MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY, Dec. 1993, p. 7864-7873 0270-7306/93/127864-10$02.00/0 Copyright X 1993, American Society for Microbiology

Mutational Analysis of Yeast Profilin

BRIAN K. HAARER,t AUDREY S. PETZOLD, AND SUSAN S. BROWN*

Department ofAnatomy and Cell Biology, The University ofMichigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109 Received 15 July 1993/Returned for modification 1 September 1993/Accepted 20 September 1993 We have mutated two regions within the yeast profilin gene in an effort to functionally dissect the roles of actin and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) binding in profilin function. A series of truncations was three amino acids nearly eliminated the ability of profilin to bind polyproline in vitro but had no dramatic in vivo effects. Thus, the extreme C terminus is implicated in polyproline binding, but the physiological relevance of this interaction is called into question. More extensive truncation, of up to eight amino acids, had in vivo effects of increasing severity and resulted in changes in conformation and expression level of the mutant hypothesized might be involved in PIP2 binding. Alteration of basic amino acids in this region produced mutant adenylate cyclase-associated protein (Cap/Srv2p [A. Vojtek, B. Haarer, J. Field, J. Gerst, T. D. Pollard, S. S. Brown, and M. Wigler, Cell 66:497-505, 1991]), indicating that a defect could be demonstrated in vivo. In vitro with actin, independently of whether PIP2 binding was reduced. Since our earlier studies of Acanthamoeba

carried out at the C terminus of profilin, a region that has been implicated in actin binding. Removal of the last

profilins. However, the ability of these mutants to bind actin in vitro

was not eliminated, suggesting that this

region cannot be solely responsible for actin binding. We also mutagenized a region of profilin that we

profilins that functioned well in vivo. Many of these mutants, however, were unable to suppress the loss of

assays demonstrated that the inability to suppress loss of Cap/Srv2p correlated with a defect in the interaction

profilins suggested the importance of PIP2 binding for suppression,

implicated and that function. an

we conclude that both activities are

interplay between PIP2 binding and actin binding may be important for profilin

Vol. 13, No. 12

Profilin is a low-molecular-size (12 to 15 kDa) protein that interacts with actin (16, 30). Profilin can also bind to the acidic phospholipid L-a-phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) and to a lesser extent, phosphatidylinositol monophosphate (23). It has been proposed that interaction with PIP2 may regulate the availability of profilin for interaction with actin (23). Alternatively, profilin may be present to prevent the cleavage of PIP2 by phospholipase C-yl (PLC); such inhibition can be overcome by phosphorylation of PLC (13, 14, 26), an event that can occur after stimulation of various growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases (39). Thus, activation of PLC by tyrosine kinase receptors could initiate signaling cascades by overcoming the profilin block, resulting in cleavage of PIP2 into the second messengers inositol triphosphate and diacylglycerol. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, profilin is required (18) for the proper organization of the actin cytoskeleton into actin cables that generally run longitudinally through the cell and cortical actin spots that occur at regions of active growth (1, 22). Profilin, like actin, is required for proper maintenance of cell polarity, as exhibited by delocalized secretion of cell wall chitin and aberrant budding in cells lacking profilin (18). It has not been determined whether these phenotypes can be directly attributed to profilin's role as an actin-binding protein, to its ability to bind PIP2, or perhaps to some as yet unidentified property of profilin. The recent finding that overexpression of profilin could suppress some of the defects associated with deletion of the gene encoding a 70-kDa adenylate cyclase-associated protein (CAP [38]; * Corresponding author. Electronic mail (Bitnet) address: usergeaz@umichum. t Present address: Department of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712. also known as SRV2 [9]) provided interesting links between the signal transduction machinery and cytoskeletal maintenance and reorganization. Adenylate cyclase-associated protein (hereafter referred to as Cap/Srv2p, and not to be confused with actin-capping protein subunits, encoded by the CAPI and CAP2 genes [3]) appears to be a bifunctional protein, apparently playing a role in the RAS-mediated activation of adenylate cyclase (however, see reference 40) and providing other functions that, when defective, result in abnormalities that are somewhat similar to the defects of a profilin-deficient strain (11, 18, 38). It is these latter defects that are suppressed by overexpression of profilin. We have found that the ability of two Acanthamoeba isoforms of profilin to suppress the latter defects of Cap/Srv2p correlates with their ability to bind PIP2 (38). This finding suggests that Cap/Srv2p as well as profilin may interact with the signaling pathway that involves PIP2 cleavage. Although little is known about PIP2 signaling in yeast cells, the observation that PIP2 is essential to growth (34) is an indication that it plays an important role. At our present level of knowledge, it is possible that both Cap/Srv2p and profilin are exerting effects on, or are being regulated by, actin and/or PIP2 and related elements. To address these questions, and in an attempt to dissect the known properties of profilin, we have sought to specifically alter profilin's ability to interact with actin or PIP2. A likely candidate region for interaction with actin is found at the carboxy terminus of profilin. This region contains a sequence motif (hereafter referred to as LADYLIG) that is highly conserved among a subset of actin-binding proteins (35). In addition, chemical cross-linking experiments (36) have demonstrated a close interaction between actin and the homologous region of an Acanthamoeba profilin. The selection of potential PIP2-binding sites rested

7864


VOL. 13, 1993 on the observations that (i) multiple PIP2 molecules could bind to individual profilin molecules (14), (ii) basic residues are likely candidates for interaction with acidic phosphate residues (29), (iii) yeast profilin exhibits a cluster of basic residues between amino acid positions 67 and 82, and (iv) residues 71 to 80 are highly conserved between yeast and Acanthamoeba profilins, and moreover, this region contains most of the basic residues whose positions are conserved. In this report, we have altered these two regions of profilin by site-directed mutagenesis and have examined both in vivo effects and the ability of mutant profilins to bind actin and PIP2 in vitro. We conclude that both actin and PIP2 binding, perhaps working in a coordinated fashion, are relevant to profilin function. MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents. Poly-L-proline (8,000 kDa), bovine serum albumin (BSA), and PIP2 were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, Mo.); a site-directed mutagenesis kit and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (affinity purified) were obtained from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Richmond, Calif.); cyanogen bromide-activated Sepharose 4B was obtained from Pharmacia Fine Chemicals (Piscataway, N.J.); Centricon microconcentrators were obtained from Amicon Corp. (Danvers, Mass.); Ultrafree MC low-binding Millipore PLTK filters (30,000molecular-weight cutoff) were obtained from Millipore Corp. (Bedford, Mass.); DNase I and DNase I-Sepharose were obtained from Worthington Biochemical Corp. (Freehold, N.J.); yeast nitrogen base (without amino acids), yeast extract, Bacto Peptone, and Bacto Agar were obtained from Difco Laboratories (Detroit, Mich.); 1"I-labeled donkey anti-rabbit immunoglobulin was obtained from Amersham (Arlington Heights, Ill.). Yeast strains and growth conditions. S. cerevisiae diploid strain 22ABA1 (A Ta/MA Ta ura3lura3 trpl/trpl lys2/lys2 his3lhis3 leu2/leu2 PFFYJ/pfyl::LEU2) contains a complete deletion of one of its two copies of the profilin coding region as described previously (18). Wild-type and profilin deletion haploid strains (22ABA1-6A and 22ABA1-6D, respectively) are haploid segregants of 22ABA1. Profilin deletion haploid strains containing only plasmid-borne profilin genes or control plasmids were generated by transforming 22ABA1 with the appropriate plasmid and then sporulating the cells and performing tetrad dissection; the haploid progeny of interest were selected as being Leu+ (marking the profilin deletion) and Ura+ (from the plasmid-borne URA3 gene). Note that this procedure also produces PFY+ haploid segregants carrying plasmids, allowing us to determine that the mutant profilins had no apparent detrimental effects when overproduced. Multiple segregants from such crosses were examined for growth rate, morphology, and temperature sensitivity, and results were consistent for all segregants carrying a given plasmid. Thus, possible differences in genetic background do not grossly affect these properties. Plasmid selection was maintained by growing cells in minimal medium (0.67% yeast nitrogen base, 2% glucose) supplemented with tryptophan, lysine, histidine, adenine, and leucine; strains were otherwise grown as described previously (18); growth was generally at 22°C. DNA manipulations, yeast genetic techniques, and plasmid constructions. Standard procedures were used for recombinant DNA manipulation (31), Escherichia coli and yeast transformation (6, 25, 31), and yeast genetic manipulations (32).

YEAST PROFILIN MUTANTS 7865

Plasmid YEp420(PFY) (generously provided by A. Adams) consists of a 1.8-kbp BamHI-HindIII fragment containing the complete profilin coding region inserted at the BamHI-HindIII sites of YEp420 (25). Other parent plasmids used for maintenance of wild-type or mutant profilins were YEp1O2 (38) and YCp50 (25). Nonsense mutations near the end of the profilin coding region were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis of single-stranded template from mpl9(PFY) (consisting of a 1.8kbp BamHI-HindIII fragment containing the profilin gene in M13mpl9), using the following mutagenic primers (each results in a TAA nonsense codon): TTGATTGGTTAAC AATACTAAT'lT (mutates codon 124 to make the -3PFY truncated profilin); GACTACTTGATl''AAGTTCAATACT AA (mutates codon 123 to make -4PFY); GGCTGACTACT AAATTGG (mutates codon 121 to make -6PFY); GCTGAC TAATTGATTG (mutates codon 120 to make -7PFY); and GCAATTGGCTI7AATACTfG (mutates codon 119 to make -8PFY). In some cases, these primers were used for plaque hybridization to screen for mutations. Mutations were confirmed by sequencing; inserts with the appropriate mutations were shuttled to plasmids YCp50 and YEp102 as 1.8-kbp BamHI-HindIII fragments. The genes encodingAcanthamoeba profilins I and II were placed next to the yeast profilin promoter on high-copynumber vectors to create plasmids YEp(PFY-PI) and YEp(PFY-PII) as described previously (38). In addition, these yeast-Acanthamoeba hybrids were also moved as EagIXhoI fragments into the YCp5O EagI-SalI sites to create the low-copy-number plasmids YCp(PFY-PI) and YCp(PFYPII). Purification of yeast actin and profilins. Yeast actin was prepared by DNase I affinity chromatography from strain DBY877 (MATa his4; provided by D. Botstein) and treated as described previously (18). Yeast profilins were prepared from profilin deletion strains harboring plasmid-borne wildtype or mutant profilin genes. Purification was by polyproline affinity chromatography as described previously (18) except that the bulk of mutant profilins 111, 112, 115, and 116 eluted with 3 M urea rather than 6 M urea, which is required to elute the bulk of wild-type and mutant 43 profilin (see Fig. 8). Actin binding determined by DNase I-Sepharose batch adsorption. Actin binding was determined by batch adsorption to Sepharose-bound DNase I. Profilin-actin complexes in crude lysates bind, via the actin, to this resin with high affinity (7). Yeast strains carrying the appropriate mutant or wild-type profilin on a high-copy-number plasmid were grown in selective medium to late log phase and then harvested and lysed as described previously (18). Total protein lysates were partially clarified by spinning for 3 min in a microcentrifuge; supernatants were diluted to 2.5 p,g/pl (for studies with truncated profilins and Acanthamoeba profilins expressed in yeast cells) or 1.25 ug/,ul (for basicresidue mutant profilins) in lysis buffer (18). DNase I-Sepharose and BSA-Sepharose resins were washed several times in lysis buffer, with a final 1:1 suspension of resin in lysis buffer. Resin suspensions (40 ,ul) were mixed with 100 ,ul of diluted protein samples and incubated at 4°C with vigorous shaking for 60 to 75 min. Samples were then underlayered with 200 ,ul of 20% sucrose in lysis buffer and spun at 7,000 x g in a swinging-bucket microcentrifuge for 1 min. Western blots of the resin pellets and equivalent amounts of total protein were probed with anti-yeast profilin antiserum at 1:100 dilution; horseradish peroxidase-conju-


7866 HAARER ET AL.

MOL. CELL. BIOL. RESULTS Overexpression of yeast profilin. We introduced mutated profilin genes (described below) into a profilin deletion strain to see whether they could substitute for the missing wildtype gene. Mutant genes were introduced either on high- or low-copy-number plasmids to vary the expression level. These experiments were first carried out with the wild-type gene to investigate the effects of overexpression of normal profilin. Western blotting suggests that the presence of the wild-type profilin gene on a high-copy-number plasmid results in .10-fold overproduction of immunoreactive profilin (data not shown). We were unable to detect any effect of profilin overexpression on growth rate, microtubule or nuclear localization, chitin distribution, or general cell size and shape. Actin appearance and localization were nearly normal except for a small increase in the number of actin bars (Table 1). This is a characteristic of profilin deletion cells and is probably due to plasmid loss in these strains. These observations support those of Magdolen et al. (27), who also detect little or no effect of profilin overexpression on otherwise wild-type cells. Truncation of profilin. To examine the role of the C-terminal region of profilin, which has been implicated in actin binding, we created a series of C-terminal truncations by 3' exonucleolytic cleavage. These truncations indicated that the ability to complement a profilin gene deletion was lost somewhere between removal of three and eight amino acids (data not shown). Therefore, we introduced nonsense mutations at specific codons to truncate profilin by three to eight amino acids (designated -3PFY to -8PFY; Fig. 1). Expression of profilins lacking the C-terminal three or four amino acids complemented most defects (18) of profilin deletion mutants. Profilin deletion cells carrying -3PFY or -4PFY have normal growth rates (as judged by colony size [Fig. 1] and by growth in liquid medium [Table 1]), morphology, and cell wall chitin distribution and are not temperature sensitive. Actin localized properly, although both mutants show a reduction in the intensity of staining with rhodamine-phalloidin and anti-actin antibodies and in localization of actin

spots (percent actin clusters; Table 1), perturbations in the actin cytoskeleton. indicating minor

Expression of profilin lacking six to eight amino acid residues complemented fewer of the profilin deletion defects; these cells showed loss of visible actin cables, increase in cell size, and temperature sensitivity (data not shown). The growth rate is slower than wild type (Table 1; Fig. 1) and is dependent on the copy number of the mutated profilin genes (Fig. 1). However, these more severely truncated profilins still provide some profilin function, as they (like the less severely truncated profilins) prevent the formation of the abnormal actin bars seen in profilin deletion cells and reduce the loss in clustering of actin spots. Also, the growth rates are faster than that of deletion cells (Fig. 1; Table 1). Upon examination of the truncated profilins, we noted abnormalities in their abundance and migration on Western blots. Truncation of six to eight residues increased the apparent molecular weight of profilin on SDS-polyacrylamide gels (Fig. 2A). We treated wild-type profilin with carboxypeptidase A to remove C-terminal residues and found that this gave the same shift in apparent molecular weight as the truncations did (data not shown). This result indicates that the upward shift is likely to be due to a change in folding, which is maintained even in the presence of SDS, rather than translation reading through the inserted nonsense codon. These observations raise the possibility that the

gated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody was used at 1:250 dilution (see Fig. 2A). The DNase I adsorption assay was also carried out with radioactive secondary antibody to quantitate binding (see Fig. 2B and 6). Because of large differences in expression levels of the truncated profilins, lysates from cells expressing wild-type profilin or -4PFY were diluted 4 x and 2x, respectively, with lysate from a profilin deletion strain to adjust them to approximately the same profilin concentration as for lysates from strains expressing -6PFY or -7PFY (see Fig. 2B). It was not necessary to dilute lysates from basic-residue profilin mutants to normalize profilin ratios, as all were within a twofold range of one another. Duplicate Western blots were probed with affinity-purified anti-yeast profilin antibodies (1:100) and 125I-labeled donkey anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G secondary antibody (1:100). Blots were examined by autoradiography; then bands were cut from the nitrocellulose filters (in 1-cm2 sections) and analyzed by gamma counting (a blank portion of the nitrocellulose was used to determine background counts, which were subtracted from each sample). Serial dilutions of cell lysates and of antibodies were tested to determine conditions within the linear range of this assay. Polyproline binding. Polyproline binding was determined by batch adsorption to polyproline-Sepharose (33) and was carried out essentially as for DNase I-Sepharose batch adsorption except that total protein was diluted to 1 ,g/,l prior to mixing with polyproline-Sepharose resin; both pellet and supernatant fractions were analyzed. Poly-L-proline was coupled to Sepharose 4B as described previously (18). PIP2 binding. PIP2 binding was assayed by using purified preparations of wild-type or mutant yeast profilins from strains overexpressing these profilins. As suggested by L. Machesky and T. Pollard, profilins were mixed with PIP2 micelles (prepared by sonicating a freshly thawed aliquot of 1-mg/ml [-900 ,uM] PIP2 in water) to a final concentration of 0.5 ,uM profilin and 100 ,uM PIP2 in vesicle buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 75 mM KCl, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol). Samples (150 pl) were incubated on ice 30 min, then layered on Millipore PLTK filters (30,000-molecular-weight cutoff), and spun at 2,000 x g in a swinging-bucket microcentrifuge for 90 to 120 s. Western blots (immunoblots) of filtrates from samples with and without PIP2 and equivalent amounts of total protein were probed with 1:50 to 1:100 dilutions of crude or affinity-purified antiprofilin antibodies (18) and with a 1:250 dilution of horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody. Actin binding determined by viscometry. Actin polymerization (rolling-ball viscosity) measurements were performed as described previously (18) except that the concentrations of actin and profilins were 2 and 2.85 ,M, respectively. Protein concentrations were determined by the method of Bradford (5), using BSA as a standard. Immunoblots and cell staining. Proteins were separated on 0.75-mm sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-12% polyacrylamide gels with 5% stacking layers, blotted to nitrocellulose, and probed with antibodies essentially as described previously (17, 24). To further reduce background, 2.5% BSA and 0.5% Tween 20 were added to the blocking solution when radioactive secondary antibody was used. Culture supernatants for anti-Acanthamoeba profilin monoclonal antibodies PI.2 (recognizes profilins I and II with equal affinity [20]) and PII.1 (specific for profilin II) were generously provided by D. Kaiser and T. Pollard and were used undiluted on immunoblots. Staining of nuclei, microtubules, actin, and cell wall chitin was done as described previously (18).


VOL. 13, 1993

YEAST PROFILIN MUTANTS TABLE 1. Actin patterns in cells expressing C-terminally truncated profilins

Haploid strain 22ABA&1-6A 22ABA&1-6D % Actin bars'a 0d 76f % Actin clusters" 83 38f

7867

Type of profilin expressed Wild type None -3PFY -4PFY -6PFY -7PFY -8PFY Wild type None

[22ABA1 + YEp(-3PFY)]-1lC9g 66

[22ABA1 + YEp(-4PFY)]-2Bg [22ABA&1 + YEp(-6PFY)]-2Bg [22ABA&1 + YEp(-7PFY)]-3Cg [22ABA&1 + YEp(-8PFY)]-10Y [22ABA&1 + YEp420(PFY)]-2Bg [22ABA1 + YCp5O]-6CY 8 6 llh 2h 6h ND 66 51 60 65 83 ND

Doubling time' (h) in synthetic medium NDe ND 3.9 3.6 4.8 5.4 4.5 3.7 6.9

a Actin bars are abnormal accumulations of actin seen in profilin null cells (18); these were visualized by using rabbit anti-yeast actin primary antibody; unless otherwise specified, n = 200. b Actin clusters are concentrations of cortical actin spots that occur at regions of active growth (1); these were visualized by using rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin; unless otherwise specified, n = 100. c Based on optical density at 660 nm. In general, the values are consistent with the qualitative assessment of growth rates (based on colony size) shown in Fig. 1; a minor exception is the strain carrying -8PFY. We believe that the data in Fig. 1 are more reliable, as they are based on scoring multiple segregants. ' ND, not determined. fN = 50. g Haploid profilin deletion strains carrying a control plasmid (YCp5O) or wild-type or truncated profilins on high-copy-number vectors (see Materials and Methods). h The occasional bars are probably due to plasmid loss, resulting in a profilin deletion cell. Plasmid loss occurs at low frequency even under conditions that select for plasmid retention (4).

d n = 500.

phenotypic effects resulting from truncation of six or more residues may result from a conformational change in profilin rather than a specific effect of the loss of those residues. We also noted that successive removal of C-terminal residues reduced the level of profilin detected (compare totals in Fig. 2A). We do not know whether this is due to a reduction in the synthesis, a reduction in staining intensity, or more likely, to increased lability of the truncated profilins. However, a reduction in the amount of profilin cannot by itself account for the reduced ability to complement a profilin deletion mutation, as even the cells carrying the most extensive truncation on a high-copy-number plasmid produce as much profilin as is present in wild-type cells, quantitated by probing Western blots using radioactive secondary antibody (data not shown). We next tested the ability of truncated profilins to bind actin in the DNase I-Sepharose assay. Even the most severely truncated profilins were able to bind actin (Fig. 2A; compare lanes D and B for each mutant). However, the decreasing amounts of total profilin made it difficult to assess to what degree this binding might be affected. Therefore, we

A

WT T D B -3PFY T D B -4PFY T D B

P.mm mmw.

-6PFY T D B

-7PFY -8PFY

T D B T D B

_m 'a

B

8000 -

6000

C) 4000-

2000-

L A D Y L I

Profilin type -8PFY

High Copy +/-

Low Copy -

-7PFY -6PFY

+1-

-

+

+l-

G V Q YCOOH

-4PFY -3PFY

++ ++

37 25 26 20

mfr -4PFY -6PFY -7PFY

++ ++

FIG. 1. Carboxy-terminal truncation of profilin by nonsense codon mutagenesis. The last 10 amino acid residues of profilin are shown on the top line. The second line lists the designations for truncated profilins and indicates the number of missing amino acids. The ability of each truncated gene, when present on plasmid profilin deletion growth rate; + and +/-, intermediate growth rates. These relative growth rates were determined by observation of segregant growth on YEPD plates after dissection of tetrads (see Materials and Methods) and thus may partially reflect spore germination rates as well.

YEplO2 (high copy) or YCp5O (low copy), to complement a profilin

deletion is indicated as follows: + +, wild-type growth rate; -,

FIG. 2. DNase I-batch adsorption assay of truncated profilins. Shown are assays of strains (see Table 1) expressingwild-type profilin (WT) or mutant profilins lacking three to eight C-terminal amino acids (-3PFY to -8PFY); in each case, profilins were expressed from high-copy-number plasmids. (A) Western blot of total proteins (lanes T) and proteins adsorbed to DNase I-Sepharose (lanes D) or BSASepharose as a control (lanes B). (B) Quantitation of DNase I-batch adsorption data obtained by using a I-labeled secondary antibody. The open portion of each box represents the amount of profilin bound to DNase I-Sepharose (values indicate percent profilin bound); open plus stippled regions represent total input profilin in the assay. Lines (including -3PFY and -8PFY, which were not assayed in this experiment) were assayed in duplicate in at least two separate experiments, and all show similar binding.

are ranges of values from two sets of samples. All truncated profilins


7868

HAARER ET AL. PPro BSA MOL. CELL. BIOL.

T S P S P

-

m.W WT

PPro BSA T S P S P PPro BSA T S P S P PFY T -

111 116

P T - P T P

-3PFY -4PFY

PFY 43

-

112

PPro BSA T S P S P PPro BSA T S P S P PPro BSA T S P S P

T P T

_

P T P

115 _

P

-_--_0-0

-6PFY -7PFY -8PFY FIG. 5. PIP2 binding of wild-type and basic-residue mutant pro-

FIG. 3. Polyproline binding of truncated profilins. Western blots of total protein (lanes T) and supernatant (lanes S) and pellet (lanes P) fractions from polyproline (PPro) and control (BSA) batch

adsorption assays were probed with anti-yeast profilin antibodies.

Strains used were the same as for Fig. 2.

filins. Western blot of total input profilin (lanes T) and profilin that

can pass through a

absence (lanes -)

(PFY) or

30,000-molecular-weight cutoff filter in the

or presence (lanes P) of PIP2, using wild-type

basic-residue mutant (43, 111, 112, 115, and 116) profilins

(for mutant strain designations, refer to Fig. 4). Only the 12- to

15-kDa regions of the immunoblots are presented.

adjusted samples to the same actin/profilin ratio and quantitated binding by using radioactive secondary antibody. This

assay revealed that the truncated profilins show only a

modest reduction in binding relative to wild-type profilin soluble DNase I virtually eliminated actin binding to the resin and reduced the amount of bound profilin by 90%. Therefore, we conclude that the C-terminal (LADYLIG) region of profilin is not essential for actin binding. In contrast, truncation of as few as three amino acids dramatically decreased polyproline binding (Fig. 3). The reduction in the total amount of profilin present in assays of the more severe truncation mutants prevents us from judging whether there is any further reduction in binding capacity (Fig. 2B). As a control, addition of a 10-fold molar excess of

upon further truncation. However, the fact that -3PFY cells grow well even though their profilin has lost most of its

capacity to bind polyproline suggests either that polyproline binding is not essential or that profilin may normally be present in large excess for this function. While we cannot rule out the possibility that the ability to bind polyproline

was lost after the cells were lysed, the DNase assay indicates

that the mutant profilins are not simply denatured. Basic-residue profilin mutants. In an attempt to alter PIP2 collection of profilins altered at one or more of the following basic residues: Arg-72, Arg-76, Arg-81, and His-82 (38) (Fig. 4). These altered profilins were placed on low (YCp5O)- and high (YEp1O2)-copy-number vectors and tested for the ability to complement a profilin deletion. Each of these profilins

binding, we mutagenized the yeast profilin gene to create a

was able to complement the profilin deletion, as judged by

growth in liquid medium (see Fig. 7B) and by relative colony size on YEPD plates (see also reference 38), even when the mutant gene was expressed from a low-copy-number plasmid. Microscopic examination demonstrated that profilin normal with respect to actin and tubulin localization, chitin deposition, and polarity of budding (data not shown). It was previously shown that as with wild-type profilin, overexpression of two of the basic-residue mutant profilins (strains 112 and 116; Fig. 4) partially suppresses defects associated with mutation of the gene encoding adenylate cyclase-associated protein (Cap/Srv2p), while overexpression of profilins 111, 115, 119, or 124 does not (38). To further characterize the basic-residue mutants and to help explain these observations, we tested a subset of the basicresidue mutants for the ability to interact with PIP2. Microfiltration assays (Fig. 5) revealed that profilin 111 reproducibly showed the most dramatic loss in PIP2 binding. Profilin 116 appeared to bind PIP2 slightly less well than wild-type profilin in two separate experiments, whereas the others (profilins 43, 112, and 115) could not be reliably distinguished from wild type in multiple experiments. Thus, there is no obvious correlation between loss of caplsrv2 suppression and 116) bind PIP2 reasonably well, nonsuppressors may All of the basic-residue mutant profilins appeared to bind actin approximately as well as wild type in the DNase I-Sepharose batch adsorption assay (Fig. 6). In contrast to these results, defects were seen in a viscometric assay (Fig. 7A) for profilin-actin interaction. In that assay, suppressor profilin 112 was less defective than profilins 115 (a nonsuppressor) and 43. Similar results were obtained in other experiments (not shown), in which profilin 116 (the other suppressor) was less defective than profilin 111 (a nonsuppressor). Given the apparent discrepancy between the DNase and mutant profilins were simply more denatured in the latter assay (profilin must be purified for this assay, so there may be more opportunity for denaturation). Therefore, we examined the viscometry samples for the ability to bind actin in the DNase assay. All of these profilins were bound to

deletion strains suppressed by any of these constructs were

and loss of PIP2 binding; although suppressors (profilins 112

(profilin 111) or may not (profilin 115) show a defect.

viscometry assays, we wished to determine whether some

STRAIN

111

124 121 116 112 115 119 43 126

R72 E G G

R76 R81 H82

G E G G G G

K K

K G G K

D

FIG. 4. Altered amino acids in basic-residue mutant profilins.


VOL. 13, 1993 YEAST PROFILIN MUTANTS

B

7869

A

E

cn a C) Ul)

to 0

to 0

20000 | | :::

WT 111 112 116 WT 115 119 124 WT 43 121 126

40

Strain FIG. 6. DNase I-batch adsorption assay of basic-residue mutant

profilins. Binding of mutant profilins to DNase I-Sepharose was quantitated by using a "2I-labeled secondary antibody; data are presented in the same format as for Fig. 2B. a, b, and c indicate separate nitrocellulose transfers, each with an internal wild-type profflin control (WT). Wild-type and mutant profilins were expressed from high-copy-number plasmids. For mutant strain designations, refer to Fig. 4.

Time (min)

C

Pellets

Cf- s _ _ LL L-

Time (hr)

Sups

cu >-

LLaa-0 Ln)

approximately the same extent (Fig. 7C), indicating that viscometry is more sensitive or assays a different aspect of actin association, rather than being more denaturing. Goldschmidt-Clermont et al. (15) have previously documented such disparities between binding and polymerization assays, which they attribute to the complex nature of profilin's effects on actin polymerization. Thus, the DNase assay may be a better indicator of binding, while viscometry may make subtle effects more detectable. Independent evidence for differences in actin binding among the mutant profilins was obtained from their behavior on polyproline columns. Wildtype profilin and the two suppressor profilins all cause a substoichiometric amount of actin to be retained on the column, whereas the other basic-residue mutant profilins do not (Fig. 8). We also noted that while the basic-residue mutant profilins efficiently bind polyproline, some can be eluted at lower urea concentrations than others. This property did not appear to correlate with defects in either PIP2 or actin interaction (Table 2). Expression of Acanthamoeba profilins in yeast cells. We have investigated the role of expression level in the relative ability of two isoforms ofAcanthamoeba profilin to suppress deletion of the yeast profilin gene or CAP/SRV2. As reported previously (38), expression ofAcanthamoeba profilin I or II from high-copy-number vectors is able to suppress a deletion of the yeast profilin gene. We have also examined suppression by these profilins when expressed from low-copynumber vectors and have found that YCp(PFY-PI), which contains the profilin I coding region, provides intermediate levels of suppression, while YCp(PFY-PII) has little or no effect on the profilin deletion phenotype (data not shown). These results are consistent with our previous report that YEp(PFY-PI) affords slightly better suppression than YEp(PFY-PII) at elevated temperatures (38). The relative ability of these constructs to suppress a profilin deletion may be due to relative expression levels, as profilin I is present at a higher level (Fig. 9; compare lanes 1 and 4). DNase I-batch adsorption assays (Fig. 9) indicate that profilins I and II have a low (compare with Fig. 2A) but detectable (compare the D

FIG. 7. Ability of basic-residue mutants to retard actin polymerization. (A) Viscometry assay. Profilin (2.85 ,uM) was added to 2 ,M actin, and MgCl2 was added at 0 min to polymerize the actin. Viscosity was determined at the time points shown by rolling-ball viscometry; duplicate curves were performed and were in close agreement (data not shown). Closed circles, no added profilin; closed triangles, wild-type profilin; open circles, profilin 112; open squares, profilin 115; open triangles, profilin 43. (B) Growth curves for strains overexpressing the profilins assayed in panel A. Cells were grown in liquid medium, and the optical density at 660 nm (OD6w) was recorded. Symbols are the same as in panel A except that closed circles represent the growth rate of a wild-type strain (DBY877) that is not overexpressing profilin. (C) DNase I-Sepharose assay of the viscometry samples shown in panel A. Pellets, amount of profilin in each sample that associates with the resin; Sups, amounts of profilins that remain in the supernatant fraction (diluted threefold relative to the pellets). Strains used were the same as for Fig. 5 and 6.

and B lanes in Fig. 9) affinity for yeast actin. This may explain why expression of these profilins from high-copynumber plasmids is required for suppression of the yeast profilin gene deletion. In contrast to suppression of a yeast profilin gene deletion, YEp(PFY-PII) is able to suppress cap/srv2, while YEp(PFYPI) is not (38), leading to the conclusion that this suppression is not due to relative abundance. Thus, our original hypothesis, that the difference in cap/srv2 suppression may be due to differences in the affinities of the two Acanthamoeba profilin isoforms for PIP2, still stands. DISCUSSION Profilin has been shown to interact in vitro with several molecules, including actin, PIP2, and polyproline. To investigate the contribution of these interactions to profilin function, we have used site-directed mutagenesis to study two different regions of profilin (a summary of our findings is provided in Table 2). First, we have altered basic residues in a highly conserved region that we postulated might be involved in PIP2 binding. We found that substituting an acidic residue at one position (Arg-72 to a Glu) had a


7870 PFY

co co

HAARER ET AL.

115 43 112 111 116 1

-w

2 3

CO CO CIO co co CC co co co co

T D B Pi

4 5 6 T D B Pll

MOL. CELL. BIOL. 7 8 9

4-

T D B Pll

FIG. 9. DNase I-batch adsorption assay of Acanthamoeba pro-

A filins I and II expressed in yeast cells. Western blots were made of

A A.

total protein (T) and protein adsorbed to DNase I-Sepharose (D)

BSA-Sepharose (B). Lanes 1 to 3 and 4 to 9 are

or

from yeast strains

harboring plasmids YEp(PFY-PI) and YEp(PFY-PII), respectively, which contain the Acanthamoeba profilin I (PI) and profilin II (PII)

genes linked to the yeast

were

and

profilin gene promoter (32). Lanes 1 to 6

probed with monoclonal antibody PI.2 (recognizes profilins I

II with equal affinity); lanes 7 to 9 were probed with monoclonal

antibody P11.1 (specific for profilin II).

P -4

polyproline, argues that these mutations are having local

rather than global effects. The three-dimensional structure of

Acanthamoeba profilin (obtained by nuclear magnetic

nance spectroscopy

explanation of our

reso-

[37]) does not immediately provide an

results but does not rule out that they

FIG. 8. Peak urea elution fractions from polyproline purification

of profilins. Shown are the peak fractions from 3 and 6 M urea

elution of wild-type (PFY) and basic-residue mutant profilins from

polyproline columns. Lanes are from three separate Coomassie-

stained 12% polyacrylamide gels, as denoted by common underlin-

ing; profilin bands were used to align lanes, but note that separation

is greater in the 111-116 gel. P, profilin bands; A, actin bands in 3 M The apparent bands in the profilin 116 6 M urea fraction are from

urea fractions from purification of wild-type, 112, and 116 profilins.

spillover of molecular weight markers in

used were the same as for Fig. 5 and 6.

an adjacent lane. Strains

could be due to local effects. Further discussion of the

structural implications of

paper on the

our mutations is forthcoming in a

X-ray crystal structure of Acanthamoeba

profilin (2). While it does not

profilin is involved in both

appear that the same region of

PIP2 and actin binding (perhaps in

contrast to other actin-binding proteins [19, 29, 41]), the

probable binding faces

may

are adjacent (37). Thus, steric effects

explain the observation (23) that PIP2 causes dissocia-

substantial effect on PIP2 binding, but

nearby residue (Arg-76 to a

a similar change at a

Glu) had less of an effect. Other

changes, which did not introduce

undetectable effects on

a negative charge, had

PIP2 binding. These findings are

consistent with the hypothesis that charge in this region is involved in PIP2 binding. Unexpectedly, these mutations also affect actin binding. Both Arg-72 and Arg-81 appear important for actin interaction, whereas altering Arg-76 has less effect. The fact that a given mutation can have different effects on these two binding properties, taken together with the fact that all of the basic-residue mutant profilins bind

tion of actin-profilin complexes, and the mechanism of action of profilin might involve switching between binding actin or PIP2. These findings also further our understanding of the mechanism of suppression of caplsrv2 (see the introduction). We have found that suppression is lost when the interaction with also reduced. This correlation leads us to suggest that profilin might suppress by substituting for Cap/Srv2p in binding to actin. This fits with the identification by Gieselthat shows significant homology to Cap/Srv2p and with the

actin is most affected, regardless of whether PIP2 binding is

mann and Mann (12) of an actin-binding protein (ASP-56)

TABLE 2. Summary of wild-type and mutant profilin properties

ACAP suppression' + NDW

-

+ + ND ND ND +

PIP2

bindinge

+ +

-

+ + + ND ND ND ND

+e

++e

Profilin type Wild type 43

111

112 115 116 119,124 121,126 -3,-4PFY -6,-7,-8PFY PI PII a From Vojtek et al. (38).

b

APFY suppression + + + + + + + + +

+/+ +

By viscometry" + -

-

+/-

Actin binding By DNase + + + + +

Polyproline

bindingexC

++ ++ + + + + ND ND ND ND

On polyprolineb + -

-

+ -

++ +

ND ND ND ND ND ND + + + + +/+/ND ND ND ND ND ND

A minus sign does not necessarily indicate a total lack of activity.

c + +, 6 M urea is

required to elute the bulk of profilin from a polyproline column; +, the profilin can be eluted with 3 M urea.

dND, not determined. e Extrapolated from data of

Machesky et al. (26) and therefore not directly comparable with other data in this column.


VOL. 13, 1993 finding that Cap/Srv2p can coimmunoprecipitate with actin (10). The present results do not address the question ofwhether PIP2 binding is also involved in caplstv2 suppression, as both suppressor profilins bind PIP2 reasonably well. Our previous results with Acanthamoeba profilins (38) indicated that PIP2 binding is important. In that study, the basic isoform of Acanthamoeba profilin (profilin II) could suppress Cap/Srv2p defects, while the acidic isoform (profilin I) could not. Profilin II binds PIP2 at least 10 times more strongly than profilin I does (26), but both bind to Acanthamoeba actin equally well (21). Our results (Fig. 9) suggest that both also bind yeast actin to roughly the same degree, although neither binds as well as yeast profilin does. We have also examined expression levels of the Acanthamoeba profilins in yeast cells and find that the suppressor (profilin II) is actually expressed at a lower level than the nonsuppressor (profilin I) is; thus, cap/srv2 suppression is not simply a function of expression level. Taken together, these findings suggest that both PIP2 and actin binding may be involved in caplsrv2 suppression and, by extension, that both of these in vitro properties of profilin are used in vivo. It is appealing to suggest that profilin and Cap/Srv2p can each serve as a link between signaling pathways that involve PIP2 and responses of the actin cytoskeleton. We have also altered a second region of profilin, a highly conserved sequence near the C terminus that has been implicated in actin binding (see the introduction). We have deleted most of this region by truncation. Contrary to expectation, the region does not appear to be essential for actin binding, as these profilins continue to show activity in the DNase assay and prevent the formation of actin bars in a profilin deletion background. However, these experiments do not rule out the possibility that this C-terminal region participates in the interaction with actin, especially since we have seen that the DNase assay may not be the most sensitive assay for actin interaction. We have also shown that the C terminus is important for conformation and stability. Our results are consistent with those of Eichinger et al. (8), who found that a similar deletion in severin might reduce but did not eliminate actin binding, and those of McLaughlin et al. (28), who have recently reported the structure of a segment of gelsolin complexed with actin. A comparison with that structure predicts that our most severe truncation of profilin would remove the last turn of an actin-binding a helix but would not remove residues that make contact with actin. It was also interesting to note that the last three residues of profilin are important for polyproline binding in vitro. While we cannot rule out that the residual binding activity is adequate for in vivo function, it is also possible that polyproline binding does not correspond to a physiologically relevant function of profilin. There are several considerations that are important to the comparison of in vitro and in vivo data. One is expression level; mutant proteins may work less well in vivo because less of the protein is present rather than because of any specific change that has been made. Therefore, we have quantitated expression levels of mutant profilins on Western blots by using a radioactive secondary antibody. Truncation does appear to make profilin less stable; it can be seen in Fig. 2A that progressively less profilin is present with increasing truncation. However, this does not appear to account for the deleterious in vivo effects, as even the most truncated profilin, when expressed from a high-copy-number plasmid, is present at a roughly wild-type level. We postulate that in

YEAST PROFILIN MUTANTS 7871

vivo effects may instead result from the apparent conformation change in profilin and/or to some effect on the interaction with actin or other components that have not been identified. The basic residue mutants, on the other hand, do not appear to be less stable (Fig. 6). On the contrary, cap/srv2 nonsuppressor profilins are apparently overexpressed (less than twofold) relative to wild-type and suppressor profilins on high-copy-number plasmids. Perhaps a somewhat higher copy number of plasmid is selected for to compensate for the defect(s) in these profilins (even though no obvious defects are seen in cells presumably expressing less mutant profilin, i.e., with low-copy-number plasmids). Because we are studying the mutant profilins expressed from plasmids, we have to take into account effects of overexpression as well as underexpression of profilin. We were initially surprised to find that overexpression of wildtype profilin had no phenotypic effects, as we anticipated that overexpression might cause sequestration of too much actin or PIP2. We have also found that overexpression of any of the mutant profilins in this study has no phenotypic effects (see Materials and Methods). Although we can conclude that overexpression is not having negative effects, the possibility remains that it may mask partial defects in some of the mutant profilins. This is a likely explanation in the case of mutant 111. Although this mutation can suppress profilin gene deletion when present on either high- or low-copy number plasmids, gene replacement leads to morphological abnormalities and a growth rate that is intermediate between wild-type and deletant rates (unpublished results). Overexpression may also mask phenotypic effects in other basic residue mutants, especially those that cannot suppress cap! srv2 and are therefore demonstrably defective in an in vivo function. Overexpression also diminishes phenotypic effects in the case of the truncation mutants (Fig. 1). Similarly, overexpression may allow Acanthamoeba profilins to function in yeast cells, despite their poor interaction with yeast actin (Fig. 9). Interestingly, yeast profilin may be constitutively overexpressed in the sense that a deletion heterozygote, presumably with half the normal level of profilin, shows no phenotypic defects (data not shown). Another issue is that a defect seen in vitro may not necessarily occur in vivo. Perhaps the mutant protein is more easily denatured during in vitro handling or is stabilized by in vivo conditions (including interaction with other proteins). For example, we cannot be certain that the more severely truncated profilins, which appear to have an altered conformation in vitro, actually have this alteration in vivo. However, the close correlation between conformation change and altered morphology supports the idea that the conformation change may be present in vivo and may be causal. The ability of basic-residue mutant profilin genes to suppress profilin gene deletion might have led one to suspect that the defects seen were in vitro artifacts, except for the fact that some mutants could not suppress CAP/SRV2 deletion, confirming that defects also existed in vivo. The discrepancy may instead be due to overexpression, as discussed above. In conclusion, our studies of two regions of profilin indicate that one region is important for interaction with polyproline but not solely responsible for binding actin and that the other region is important for interaction with PIP2 and actin. These studies combined with studies of cap/srv2 suppression suggest that an interplay between actin and PIP2 binding may be important in profilin function. We are currently using these profilin mutants to genetically identify


7872 HAARER ET AL.

other proteins that may be involved in profilin function and to elucidate profilin's intriguing relationship to Cap/Srv2p. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Sue Lillie for comments and recommendations throughout this study; Tom Pollard and anonymous reviewers for critical reading of the manuscript; Laura Machesky, Don Kaiser, and Tom Pollard for recommending the PIP2 assay, for providing anti-Acanthamoeba profilin monoclonal antibodies, and for helpful discussions; Anne Vojtek and Michael Wigler for discovering cap suppression by profilin and for helpful discussions; and Steve Almo, Jeff Field, Tom Pollard, Michael Schleicher, and Alan Weeds for communicating results prior to publication. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and the American Cancer Society to S.S.B. and postdoctoral stipends from the National Institutes of Health and from a University of Michigan NIH training grant in developmental biology to B.K.H. This investigation was also supported in part by NIH grant MO1 RR 00042 to the Clinical Research Center of the University of Michigan. REFERENCES 1. Adams, A. E. M., and J. R Pringle. 1984. Relationship of actin and tubulin distribution to bud growth in wild-type and morphogenetic-mutant Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Cell Biol. 98:934945. 2. Almo, S. (Albert Einstein College of Medicine). Personal communication. 3. Amatruda, J. F., J. F. Cannon, K. Tatchell, C. Hug, and J. A. Cooper. 1990. Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton in yeast capping protein mutants. Nature (London) 344:352-354. 4. Botstein, D., and R. W. Davis. 1982. Principles and practice of recombinant DNA research with yeast, p. 607-636. In J. N. Strathern, E. W. Jones, and J. R. Broach (ed.), The molecular biology of the yeast Saccharomyces: metabolism and gene expression. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y. 5. Bradford, M. M. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal. Biochem. 72:248-254. 6. Bruschi, C. V., A. R. Comer, and G. A. Howe. 1987. Specificity of DNA uptake during whole cell transformation of S. cerevisiae. Yeast 3:131-137. 7. Carlsson, L., L.-E. Nystrom, I. Sundkvist, F. Markey, and U. Lindberg. 1976. Profilin, a low-molecular weight protein controlling actin polymerisability, p. 39-49. In S. V. Perry et al. (ed.), Contractile systems in non-muscle tissues. Elsevier/ North-Holland Biomedical Press, Amsterdam. 8. Eichinger, L., A. A. Noegel, and M. Schleicher. 1991. Domain structure in actin-binding proteins: expression and functional characterization of truncated severin. J. Cell Biol. 112:665-676. 9. Fedor-Chaiken, M., R. J. Deschenes, and J. R. Broach. 1990. SRV2, a gene required for RAS activation of adenylate cyclase in yeast. Cell 61:329-340. 10. Field, J. (Columbia University). Personal communication. 11. Gerst, J. E., K. Ferguson, A. Vojtek, M. Wigler, and J. Field. 1991. CAP is a bifunctional component of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae adenylyl cyclase complex. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:12481257. 12. Gieselmann, R., and K. Mann. 1992. ASP-56, a new actin sequestering protein from pig platelets with homology to CAP, an adenylate cyclase-associated protein from yeast. FEBS Lett. 298:149-153. 13. Goldschmidt-Clermont, P. J., J. W. Kim, L. M. Machesky, S. G. Rhee, and T. D. Pollard. 1991. Regulation of phospholipase C--Yl by profilin and tyrosine phosphorylation. Science 251:12311233. 14. Goldschmidt-Clermont, P. J., L. M. Machesky, J. J. Baldassare, and T. D. Pollard. 1990. The actin-binding protein profilin binds to PIP2 and inhibits its hydrolysis by phospholipase C. Science 247:1575-1578.

MOL. CELL. BIOL. 15. Goldschmidt-Clermont, P. J., L. M. Machesky, S. K. Doberstein, and T. D. Pollard. 1991. Mechanism of the interaction of human platelet profilin with actin. J. Cell Biol. 113:1081-1089. 16. Haarer, B. K., and S. S. Brown. 1990. Structure and function of profilin. Cell Motil. Cytoskel. 17:71-74. 17. Haarer, B. K., and J. R. Pringle. 1987. Immunofluorescence localization of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae CDC12 gene product to the vicinity of the 10-nm filaments in the mother-bud neck. Mol. Cell. Biol. 7:3678-3687. 18. Haarer, B. K., S. H. Lillie, A. E. M. Adams, V. Magdolen, W. Bandlow, and S. S. Brown. 1990. Purification of profilin from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and analysis of profilin-deficient cells. J. Cell Biol. 110:105-114. 19. Janmey, P. A., J. Lamb, P. G. Allen, and P. T. Matsudaira. 1992. Phosphoinositide-binding peptides derived from the sequences of gelsolin and villin. J. Biol. Chem. 267:11818-11823. 20. Kaiser, D. A. (Johns Hopkins University). Personal communication. 21. Kaiser, D. A., M. Sato, R. F. Ebert, and T. D. Pollard. 1986. Purification and characterization of two isoforms of Acanthamoeba profilin. J. Cell Biol. 102:221-226. 22. Kilmartin, J. V., and A. E. M. Adams. 1984. Structural rearrangements of tubulin and actin during the cell cycle of the yeast Saccharomyces. J. Cell Biol. 98:922-933. 23. Lassing, I., and U. Lindberg. 1985. Specific interaction between phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and profilactin. Nature (London) 314:472-474. 24. Lillie, S. H., and S. S. Brown. 1987. Artifactual immunofluorescent labelling in yeast, demonstrated by affinity purification of antibody. Yeast 3:63-70. 25. Ma, H., S. Kunes, P. Schatz, and D. Botstein. 1987. Plasmid construction by homologous recombination in yeast. Gene 58:201-216. 26. Machesky, L. M., P. J. Goldschmidt-Clermont, and T. D. Pollard. 1990. The affinities of human platelet and Acanthamoeba profilin isoforms for polyphosphoinositides account for their relative abilities to inhibit phospholipase C. Cell Regul. 1:937-950. 27. Magdolen, V., D. G. Drubin, G. Mages, and W. Bandlow. 1993. High levels of profilin suppress the lethality caused by overproduction of actin in yeast cells. FEBS Lett. 316:41-47. 28. McLaughlin, P. J., J. T. Gooch, H.-G. Mannherz, and A. G. Weeds. 1993. Structure of gelsolin segment 1-actin complex and the mechanism of filament severing. Nature (London) 364:685692. 29. Moriyama, K., N. Yonezawa, H. Sakai, I. Yahara, and E. Nishida. 1992. Mutational analysis of an actin-binding site of cofilin and characterization of chimeric proteins between cofilin and destrin. J. Biol. Chem. 267:7240-7244. 30. Pollard, T. D., and J. A. Cooper. 1986. Actin and actin-binding proteins. A critical evaluation of mechanisms and functions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 55:987-1035. 31. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y. 32. Sherman, F., G. R. Fink, and J. B. Hicks. 1986. Methods in yeast genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y. 33. Tanaka, M., and H. Shibata. 1985. Poly(L-proline)-binding proteins from chick embryos are a profilin and a profilactin. Eur. J. Biochem. 151:291-297. 34. Uno, I., K. Fukami, H. Kato, T. Takenawa, and T. Ishikawa. 1988. Essential role for phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate in yeast cell proliferation. Nature (London) 333:188-190. 35. Vandekerckhove, J. 1989. Structural principles of actin-binding proteins. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 1:15-22. 36. Vandekerckhove, J. S., D. A. Kaiser, and T. D. Pollard. 1989. Acanthamoeba actin and profflin can be cross-linked between glutamic acid 364 of actin and lysine 115 of profilin. J. Cell Biol. 109:619-626. 37. Vinson, V. K., S. J. Archer, E. E. Lattman, T. D. Pollard, and D. A. Torchia. 1993. Three-dimensional solution structure of Acanthamoeba profilin-I. J. Cell Biol. 122:1277-1283.


VOL. 13, 1993 38. Vojtek, A., B. Haarer, J. Field, J. Gerst, T. D. Pollard, S. S. Brown, and M. Wigler. 1991. Evidence for a functional link between profilin and CAP in the yeast S. cerevisiae. Cell 66:497-505. 39. Wahl, M., and G. Carpenter. 1991. Selective phospholipase C activation. Bioessays 13:107-113. 40. Wang, J., N. Suzuki, Y. Nishida, and T. Kataoka. 1993. Analysis

YEAST PROFILIN MUTANTS 7873

of the function of the 70-kilodalton cyclase-associated protein (CAP) by using mutants of yeast adenylyl cyclase defective in CAP binding. Mol. Cell. Biol. 13:4087-4097. 41. Yonezawa, N., Y. Homma, I. Yahara, H. Sakai, and E. Nishida. binding and actin binding activities of cofilin. J. Biol. Chem. 266:17218-17221.

1991. A short sequence responsible for both phosphoinositide


