MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY, June 1997, p. 3242­3253 0270-7306/97/$04.00 0 Copyright © 1997, American Society for Microbiology Vol. 17, No. 6

Molecular Genetic Analysis of Rts1p, a B Regulatory Subunit of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Protein Phosphatase 2A

YOUMIN SHU, HAIFENG YANG, ELIZABETH HALLBERG, AND RICHARD HALLBERG* Department of Biology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York 13244 Received 26 September 1996/Returned for modification 14 November 1996/Accepted 13 March 1997 The Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene RTS1 encodes a protein homologous to a variable B-type regulatory subunit of the mammalian heterotrimeric serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). We present evidence showing that Rts1p assembles into similar heterotrimeric complexes in yeast. Strains in which RTS1 has been disrupted are temperature sensitive (ts) for growth, are hypersensitive to ethanol, are unable to grow with glycerol as their only carbon source, and accumulate at nonpermissive temperatures predominantly as large-budded cells with a 2N DNA content and a nondivided nucleus. This cell cycle arrest can be overcome and partial suppression of the ts phenotype of rts1-null cells occurs if the gene CLB2, encoding a Cdc28 kinaseassociated B-type cyclin, is expressed on a high-copy-number plasmid. However, CLB2 overexpression has no suppressive effects on other aspects of the rts1-null phenotype. Expression of truncated forms of Rts1p can also partially suppress the ts phenotype and can fully suppress the inability of cells to grow on glycerol and the hypersensitivity of cells to ethanol. By contrast, the truncated forms do not suppress the accumulation of large-budded cells at high temperatures. Coexpression of truncated Rts1p and high levels of Clb2p fully suppresses the ts phenotype, indicating that the inhibition of growth of rts1-null cells at high temperatures is due to both stress-related and cell cycle-related defects. Genetic analyses show that the role played by Rts1p in PP2A regulation is distinctly different from that played by the other known variable B regulatory subunit, Cdc55p, a protein recently implicated in checkpoint control regulation.

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a major serine/threonine phosphatase whose activity has been linked, both genetically and biochemically, to a diverse set of intracellular functions, including DNA replication, transcription, signal transduction, and intermediary metabolism (reviewed in references 3, 5, 20, 22, 33, 45, and 48). Its biochemical characterization, carried out primarily by using mammalian cells as a source of the enzyme, has shown PP2A to be comprised of three nonidentical subunits: a catalytic subunit (C) of approximately 36 kDa, a structural subunit (A) of approximately 65 kDa, and a regulatory subunit (B) which is variable and whose mass can be from 53 to greater than 100 kDa. There is general agreement that in mammalian cells there are at least four different types of proteins that can furnish B function, three encoded by the cell's genome, designated B55 (B), B56 (B ), and B72 (B ), and one that can be provided by viruses (e.g., simian virus 40 small t antigen [21, 44]). Other B-type proteins have been identified but have not been well enough characterized to know whether they are members of one of the three already defined cellular classes or novel forms. Within each B subunit class, multiple isoforms may exist. This can be due to the expression of a family of related genes (4, 18, 39) and/or because alternative RNA splicing results in the production of different proteins (10). In mammalian systems and Drosophila melanogaster, particular B class isoforms may be expressed in a time- and tissuespecific fashion (4, 16, 19, 39, 49). Biochemical and cell biological data clearly show that a particular B subunit type can both affect the substrate specificity of a PP2A trimer (12) and determine its cellular location. This localization function may be to direct PP2A to cytoskel* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Biology, Lyman Hall, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244. Phone: (315) 443-1104. Fax: (315) 443-2156. E-mail: hallberg@mailbox.syr.edu. Present address: National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. etal structures (37) and may also determine the nuclear or cytosolic location of a particular form of the enzyme (23, 39, 41). It is now widely believed that it is a combination of these two attributes of B subunits, i.e., the ability to target enzymes to particular places in the cell and the ability to modify the substrate specificity of the catalytic subunit, that allows for the regulation of the diversity of PP2A activities in the cell. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, catalytic (C) subunits of PP2A are encoded by the two closely related genes PPH21 and PPH22 and by a more distantly sequence-related gene, PPH3 (27, 36). A fourth, more distantly related gene, SIT4, may also encode a PP2A catalytic subunit (24), but this is in dispute (6, 15). Genetic studies (27) have shown that while single disruptions of any of the first three genes produce no significant mutant phenotypes, disruption of PPH21 and PPH22 produces cells with reduced growth rates, and disruption of all three genes is lethal, indicating that PP2A activity is essential for cell viability. In recent studies using an S. cerevisiae strain null for the PPH22 and PPH3 genes and expressing only a temperature-sensitive (ts) allele of PPH21, it was shown (14) that heat inactivation of the catalytic subunit of PP2A resulted in the abnormal deposition of actin cytoskeleton and the arrest of cells at the entry into mitosis. Those authors' biochemical and genetic data showed that PP2A activity was necessary for the activation of Cdc28-Clb2, a protein kinase involved in the control of the transition from G2 to M phase. With regard to other PP2A subunits in S. cerevisiae, TPD3, a gene encoding a homolog of a mammalian PP2A A subunit, was originally identified as a regulator of the biosynthesis of tRNA (43). tpd3-null cells are viable but at low temperatures become elongate and multibudded (42). They are also sensitive for growth at high temperatures. No other S. cerevisiae A subunit genes have yet been reported. Given the necessity for PP2A activity for viability, this may indicate that another Alike gene exists or that, alternatively, PP2A can still partially function in vivo without an A regulatory subunit.

3242


VOL. 17, 1997 Until recently the only known budding-yeast gene encoding a B-type subunit was CDC55. It had been identified in a screening of cold-sensitive mutants with abnormal patterns of cell growth (9). A cdc55-null strain was viable and had the same cold-sensitive phenotype exhibited by the original cdc55 mutant strain. The cdc55-null strain showed no abnormal phenotype at elevated temperatures. These observations, the pronounced heterogeneity of B-type subunits in other organisms, and the known necessity for PP2A for cell viability have led to the speculation that other B subunits probably existed in yeast as well (17). Recently, we (34) and others (7) identified genes which, when overexpressed, suppressed the mutant phenotypes of two very different ts strains. One strain was ts due to a conditional mutant allele of the mitochondrial chaperonin hsp60 (8). The suppressing gene was named SCS1 (for suppressor of chaperonin sixty) (34). The other ts strain expressed a mutant allele of ROX3, encoding a temperature-inactivable transcriptional regulator (28). The suppressing gene in this case was named RTS1 (for ROX three suppressor). These two suppressor genes are identical. (As the RTS1 sequence was entered first into the National Center for Biotechnology Information [NCBI] database, we are using that nomenclature in this and future publications.) How this protein could be involved in regulating both nuclear and mitochondrial events became clearer when it was found that RTS1 was necessary for the proper control of the global stress response (7, 34) and when it was recognized that Rts1p was homologous to the newly identified family of PP2A B regulatory subunits, B56 (4, 18). As we had shown that Rts1p was predominantly, if not exclusively, found in the cytosol (34), consistent with the primary localization of PP2A (33), this suggested that RTS1 probably encodes a second yeast B regulatory subunit. We have continued our characterization of RTS1 and have carried out experiments demonstrating that Rts1p has the proper characteristics of a PP2A regulatory subunit. Furthermore, we show that Rts1p is required for the correct regulation of the cell cycle, at least at elevated temperatures, and demonstrate that truncated forms of Rts1p can lose this cell cycleregulatory capacity while maintaining stress-related functions. This finding is made more important by recent reports (20, 47) showing Cdc55p to be required for correct cell cycle checkpoint controls.

S. CEREVISIAE Rts1p 3243

MATERIALS AND METHODS Strains and media. With one exception, the S. cerevisiae strains used in this study are all isogenic with strain W303. The rts1-null strain ( W303 expressing rts1::HIS3), the rts1-null strain expressing the influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) epitope-tagged allele RTS1::HA3 on the single-copy plasmid pRS315, and the a/ W303 strain heterozygous for the RTS1 gene (RTS1/rts1::HIS3) have all been previously described (34). The tpd3-null strain (and its TPD3 isogenic counterpart) expressing PPH21::HA on a 2 m plasmid was kindly provided by Kim Arndt. Normal growth medium was YPD (1% yeast extract, 2% Bacto Peptone, and 2% glucose) or YPG (1% yeast extract, 2% Bacto Peptone, and 3% glycerol). The synthetic medium used to select for prototrophy contained 0.67% yeast nitrogen base, 2% glucose, 0.5% Casamino Acids, and 0.002% each appropriate amino acid required for growth. To label the phosphoproteins of cells with Pi, growth media to which the label was to be added were first depleted of

32

their endogenous phosphate by the procedure described by Warner (47). Plasmids used in this study. For the purposes of the experiments described herein, genes were cloned into plasmids as follows: (i) plasmid pRS315 (LEU2 CEN6 [35]), RTS1::HA3, (34), rts1 106::HA3, rts1 216::HA3, and PPH21::HA; (ii) plasmid pRS314 (TRP1 CEN6 [35]), RTS1::his6 (34); and (iii) plasmid YEp352 (URA3 2 m [11]), CLB2, CDC55, and PIR2. Standard procedures (1) were used. The 2 m plasmid YEp24 carrying PPH21::HA was obtained from Kim Arndt. Identification, isolation, and subcloning of the genes PIR2 and CLB2. The rts1-null strain was transformed with a yeast genomic library carried on the high-copy-number plasmid YEp24 (2). Transformants were grown on selective plates supplemented with Casamino Acids at 30°C for 3 days and then replicated onto fresh selective plates and incubated at 37°C for another 3 days. Plasmid

DNAs were isolated from the colonies that grew at 37°C. Isolated plasmid DNAs were then transformed into the original host strain to retest their abilities to suppress the ts phenotype of the rts1-null strain. The inserts of those plasmids that were positive for the second screen were further analyzed by restriction enzyme digestion and Southern analysis, using an internal restriction fragment of the RTS1 gene as a probe, in order to distinguish gene complementation (reisolation of RTS1) from true extragenic suppressors. Two plasmid isolates satisfied all of the tests for suppressing activity and were named pSS1 and pSS2, with the former containing a 10.5-kb chromosomal insert and the latter containing a 7-kb insert. To identify the gene supplying the suppressing activity in pSS1, this plasmid was digested with SphI, cutting once within the insert and once in the vector, liberating a 3.8-kb fragment. The vector and attached remaining chromosomal fragment were self-ligated again to generate the plasmid pSS1-2, which retained suppressing activity. pSS1-2 was then digested with XhoI (site within the chromosomal insert) and SmaI (site within the vector), liberating a 3.3-kb fragment which was recloned into the multicopy plasmid YEp352. The resulting plasmid, which also suppressed as well as pSS1, was designated pSS1-3. pSS1-3 was then linearized with BglII (site located in the middle of the coding region of CLB2, a gene retained in the chromosomal insert of pSS1-3), and a 0.8-kb BglII fragment containing the TRP1 gene was ligated into this BglII site. The resulting plasmid, which had no suppressing activity, was designated pSS1-4. (These constructs are shown in Fig. 2a.) To identify the suppressing gene in pSS2, the plasmid was digested with SphI, thereby liberating a 5-kb fragment (one cut site was in the plasmid, and the other was in the insert). This fragment and further digestion products of it (see Fig. 2b) were subcloned into YEp352 and tested for suppressing activity. Construction of the strain with disruptions in both RTS1 and CDC55. A 2.4-kb DNA fragment encoding the full-size CDC55 gene was obtained by PCR with two synthetic primers (primer 1, GAAGCTTGGCATATACTCCCC; primer 2, GGGTACCTGATAAAGGGATGTC) and genomic DNA. The resulting amplified DNA fragment was digested with HindIII and KpnI and then cloned into the pBS( ) vector (Stratagene). The one-step gene disruption procedure (30) was used to inactivate the CDC55 gene in the diploid strain in which one of the RTS1 alleles was disrupted with the HIS3 gene (see above). This was done as follows. A BamHI/BglII fragment of the CDC55 gene in pBS( ) was removed and then replaced with a 0.8-kb BglII fragment containing the TRP1 gene. A linearized fragment containing the disrupted CDC55 gene was generated by digesting the resulting plasmid with EcoRI. This fragment was used to transform the diploid strain. The successful disruption of one of the CDC55 alleles in these transformed strains was confirmed by Southern analysis. The CDC55 gene obtained by PCR, when carried on the plasmid pRS315, fully complemented the cdc-55 null allele. Construction of the truncated forms of RTS1. To generate genes expressing truncated versions of the HA epitope-tagged Rts1p, PCR primers were designed to produce (i) a 5 portion of the RTS1 gene beginning approximately 700 nucleotides upstream from the beginning of the coding sequence and ending just after the initiating methionine codon, with the 5 end of this fragment designed to contain a BamHI site and the 3 end designed to contain an NcoI site, and (ii) two different 3 portions of the RTS1::HA3 gene, one beginning at amino acid 106 and the other beginning at amino acid 216, with both ending approximately 500 nucleotides downstream from the termination codon. Both of these fragments were designed to have NcoI sites at their 5 ends and a PstI site at their 3 ends. The 5 portion of the gene was ligated independently to each of the two 3 fragments, and the two rejoined DNAs were cloned into pRS315. These constructs were verified by restriction analysis and then used to transform W303 cells. After it was determined by Western analyses that these new genes were expressed (see below), they were designated rts1 106::HA3 ( 1) and rts1 216::HA3 ( 3). Determination of the morphological phenotype of the rts1-null strain. rts1-null cells (and any transformants thereof) were allowed to grow at 25°C to mid-log phase (optical density at 600 nm 0.6) and were then shifted to 37°C and left for 3 h. Following this heat treatment, cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed once with distilled water, and then resuspended in distilled water at one-half the original volume. The cells were fixed with 65% ethanol at room temperature for 30 min and then sonicated briefly to disrupt any aggregation that might have occurred during fixation. The prepared cells were examined by phase-contrast microscopy. To visualize nuclear DNA, the fixed cells were stained with 4 ,6diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (0.2 g/ml) for 10 min, washed twice with 100 mM Na2CO3­1 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 8.0), and then examined by fluorescence microscopy. Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) analyses of propidium di-iodide-stained cells was carried out by the Syracuse SUNY Health Science Center FACS facility. Protein isolation, electrophoresis, and Western analysis. The details of the techniques used for the solubilization and isolation of total cell protein and its separation by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDSPAGE) have been previously described (34). To identify HA epitope-tagged forms of Rts1p in whole-cell extracts, pelleted yeast cells were dissolved in 1.4 M NaOH­5% -mercaptoethanol, and the solubilized proteins were processed as previously described (8). To phosphatase treat HA-tagged Rts1p, the agaroseprotein A beads containing the adsorbed protein were washed into the appropriate buffer and treated with either calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (Pro-


3244 SHU ET AL. MOL. CELL. BIOL.

FIG. 1. Rts1p is a component of a PP2A complex. (A) Total protein extracts of cells expressing HA epitope-tagged Rts1p or Php21p were run on nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels, and the separated proteins were transferred to filters which were immunodecorated with anti-HA monoclonal antibodies. Lane 1, rts1-null cells transformed with pRS315 carrying RTS1::HA3; lane 2, W303 cells transformed with YEp352 carrying RTS1::HA3; lane 3, W303 cells transformed with YEp24 carrying PPH21::HA; lane 4, W303 cells transformed with YEp352. The mobilities of hsp60 (29) monomers, dimers, and trimers run on the same gel are indicated. (B) Extracts of cells expressing different combinations of modified and unmodified forms of Pph21p and Rts1p were applied to Ni-agarose columns, the columns were washed, and the adsorbed materials were eluted with 0.25 M imidazole. The proteins in the initial extracts and in the final eluates were separated by SDS­10% PAGE and then transferred to filters which were immunodecorated with either monoclonal anti-HA antibodies or polyclonal anti-hsp60 antibodies (as an internal negative control). In all cases about 2 to 5% of the HA-tagged protein was recovered in the final eluate. The parent strain in all cases was W303. It was doubly transformed with centromeric plasmids (pRS315 and pRS313) containing (i) PPH21::HA ( ) or PPH21 ( ) and (ii) RTS1::his6 ( ) or RTS1 ( ). (C) TPD3 and tpd3 isogenic strains that carried PPH21::HA on the plasmid YEp24 were secondarily transformed with the plasmid pRS315 carrying either RTS1 ( ) or RTS1::his6 ( ). Extracts of the resulting four strains were analyzed as for panel B for the ability to coisolate Pph21p with Rts1p on an Ni-agarose column. Lanes: 1, an aliquot of the initial extract before application to the Ni-agarose column; 2 and 3, the protein eluted with 0.25 M imidazole.

mega) or lambda protein phosphatase (New England Biolabs) before being released. Proteins separated by SDS-PAGE (10% gels) were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and immunodecorated with a monoclonal antibody (12CA5; Boehringer-Mannheim) directed against the HA epitope followed by an alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin G antibody (Bethesda Research Laboratories). Native gel electrophoresis of cytosolic protein extracts. Cytosolic extracts were prepared from log-phase cells by vigorous vortexing of cells in the presence of acid-washed glass beads (13). Pelleted and twice-washed cells were suspended in an equal volume of disruption solution (0.1 M KCl, 0.01 M Tris-Cl [pH 7.5], 0.01 M MgCl2, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and a mixture of additional protease inhibitors) to which a two-thirds volume of a glass bead slurry was added. Following six 30-s agitations (each followed by 30 s on ice), the mixture of glass beads and broken cells was centrifuged at 1,000 g for 1 min. The resulting supernatant solution was recovered and recentrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min. An aliquot of the supernatant of this final spin (the cytosolic extract) was then subjected to electrophoresis on 9% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels (25). Molecular weight markers were mono-, di-, and trimers of hsp60 (reference 29 and unpublished data). Further immunological analysis of the proteins run on native gels was carried out as previously described (8). Coisolation of epitope-tagged Pph21p with histidine-tagged Rts1p. Cytosolic extracts of rts1-null cells transformed with pRS314 carrying RTS1::his6 and YEp24 carrying PPH21::HA were prepared as described above except that the disruption solution consisted of 0.05 M NaH2PO4 (pH 8.0), 0.3 M NaCl, 0.02 M imidazole, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and a mixture of additional protease inhibitors. Aliquots of each of the cytosolic extracts containing equal amounts of protein were applied to Ni-agarose spin columns (Qiagen) which were washed three times with disruption solution. Nonspecifically adsorbed proteins were removed from the columns by washing three times with disruption solution containing 0.08 M imidazole. Specifically adsorbed proteins were eluted with two successive washes of disruption buffer containing 0.25 M imidazole. The two final eluates were combined, and the proteins therein were precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid. The precipitated eluates were redissolved in SDSPAGE sample buffer. For analysis of the initial extracts, 1 volume of 3 SDSPAGE sample buffer was added to 2 volumes of extract. Electrophoresis and Western analyses of the extracts and eluates were carried out as previously described (8, 25). RESULTS Rts1p is a component of a PP2A complex. If Rts1p is truly a PP2A B regulatory subunit, then it should copurify with at least one of the known catalytic (C) subunits of PP2A. As a first test of this, we prepared cytosolic extracts from strains expressing either a gene encoding an epitope-tagged (HA) form of Rts1p or one encoding an epitope-tagged (HA) form of Pph21p. The proteins in these extracts were separated by electrophoresis on nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels and subjected to a Western analysis. This experiment showed (Fig. 1A) that in all cases an immunoreactive protein, either Rts1p or Pph21p, migrated as a component of a high-molecularweight complex. While the mass of this complex is unknown, a trimer of hsp60 (29) with a known mass of 192 kDa had approximately the same mobility on this native gel. Assuming similar overall charges of the two complexes, the mass of the PP2A complex is approximately what one would have predicted for a PP2A ABC heterotrimer. In addition, the apparently monomeric subunits were also detected, especially in the case where the epitope-tagged proteins were overexpressed. While comigration of these two subunits suggested coassembly, it did not prove that the two proteins were, in fact, in the same complex, just that they were in similar-sized complexes. To prove coassembly, we performed the following analysis. Cytosolic extracts were prepared from cells transformed with two plasmids, one expressing an HA-tagged form of Pph21p and another expressing RTS1, either as the normal gene or as one encoding Rts1p with a six-histidine tail at its carboxyl terminus (34). These extracts were applied to nickel-agarose columns, the columns were washed with low concentrations of


VOL. 17, 1997 imidazole to remove nonspecifically adsorbed proteins, and the Ni-adsorbed proteins were then eluted with higher concentrations of imidazole. The proteins in the final eluate were precipitated, redissolved, separated by SDS­10% PAGE, and transferred to membranes. A Western analysis showed (Fig. 1B) that Pph21p was found only in that Ni column eluate in which Rts1p-(His)6 was also present. As the presence of Pph21p in the column eluate was absolutely dependent on the copresence of Rts1p-(His)6, this indicates that Rts1p and Pph21p must be in the same complex and therefore that Rts1p has the proper characteristics of a PP2A B regulatory subunit. If the PP2A complex is a heterotrimer, then the third subunit (A) would presumably be Tpd3p. Furthermore, based on what is known regarding the structure of PP2A from higher organisms (31), Tpd3p should interact directly with both Rts1p and Pph21p. If it is these interactions that bring Rts1p and Pph21p together, then in the absence of Tpd3p, Rts1p and Pph21p may not physically associate. To test that idea, we repeated the above analysis with the same plasmid-borne tagged genes, but we expressed them in a strain in which the TPD3 gene was disrupted. In this case (Fig. 1C), no coisolation of Rts1p-(His)6 with Pph21p-HA was detected in the extracts from the tpd3 strain, while again, in an isogenic strain with a normal TPD3 gene, coisolation of the B and C subunits was observed. Thus, at least some of the high-molecular-weight complexes we detect on the native gel must be trimers of Pph21p, Rts1p, and Tpd3p. Identification of high-copy-number suppressors of the rts1null strain. Overexpressed genes that could possibly suppress the ts growth phenotype of the rts1-null strain (7, 34) might encode other PP2A subunits, particular substrates of PP2A, modifiers of any of the PP2A subunits, or proteins that serve a bypass function of the Rts1p-containing form of PP2A. Thus, to see if we could identify such genes, the rts1-null strain was transformed with a yeast genomic library cloned into the highcopy-number plasmid YEp24 (2), and transformants were selected for growth at a high temperature (37°C). Among approximately 25,000 transformants, 27 colonies grew after 3 days of incubation at 37°C. Plasmid DNAs were isolated from each colony and reintroduced into the original rts1-null strain. Of the 27 plasmids isolated from non-ts transformants, only 8 gave colonies that survived a second round of selection at 37°C. By restriction mapping and Southern analyses of the DNA inserts in the suppressing plasmids, the eight plasmids could be classified into three groups. One group of six contained inserts encoding the wild-type RTS1 gene, while the other plasmids (pSS-1 and pSS-2) each contained a unique chromosomal insert and were characterized further. Subcloning fragments of the 10.5-kb chromosomal insert from pSS-1 into YEp352, another high-copy-number plasmid (11), indicated that the suppressing activity was localizable to a 3.5-kb subfragment (Fig. 2a and c). The ends of this insert were sequenced, and a search of the yeast genome database indicated that we had cloned a DNA fragment containing CLB2, a gene encoding one of the B-type cyclins that regulate Cdc28 kinase (26, 38). Subsequent restriction enzyme analyses confirmed this. To prove that CLB2 was indeed the suppressing gene, a TRP1 gene was inserted into a BglII site in the open reading frame of the CLB2 gene cloned into the YEp352 plasmid. Such a construct failed to suppress the ts phenotype of the rts1-null strain, confirming that CLB2 overproduction accounted for the suppression. In a similar fashion (Fig. 2b and c), we characterized the 7.5-kb chromosomal insert in pSS-2 and localized the suppressing activity to a 3.2-kb fragment containing an open reading frame previously identified as PIR2, a gene encoding a heat-

S. CEREVISIAE Rts1p 3245

inducible and highly glycosylated protein (32). It is a member of a family of three closely related genes (40), each of which encodes a protein of about 36 kDa containing 11 or 12 inexact repeats of a 19-amino-acid sequence. The functions of these proteins are unknown. rts1-null cells exhibit a cdc-like phenotype at nonpermissive temperatures. In S. cerevisiae, Clb2-Cdc28 kinase activity has been shown (26, 38) to be required for the normal progression through the G2/M boundary of the cell cycle. Furthermore, a recent report (14) showed that PP2A activity is required for the activation of this kinase activity and as a consequence is required for entry into mitosis. A logical question, then, was whether Rts1p, in addition to being required for the proper regulation of various stress responses (7, 34), might also be required for regulating PP2A activity associated with cell cycle progression into mitosis. As the growth rate of rts1-null cells declines quite severely after a temperature shift from 25 or 30°C to 37°C, but growth does not cease completely, we reexamined the phenotype of the null strain with regard to the distribution of cells in the cell cycle after a shift to a nonpermissive temperature. rts1-null cells were grown at 30°C to early log phase, shifted to 37°C and left for 3 h, and then examined by phase-contrast microscopy (Fig. 3a and b). Unlike the control cells, the rts1-null cells accumulated primarily with large buds. Quantitatively, 89% of 400 cells examined contained large buds, while comparably treated control cells had only 41% of the same number of cells with this morphology (Fig. 3c). This finding indicated that the rts1-null strain has a rather typical cell-cycle-related (cdc) mutant phenotype. To determine the arrest point of the rts1-null cells more precisely, the 3-h, 37°C-treated cells were stained with DAPI and examined by fluorescence microscopy. In a total of 300 large-budded rts1-null cells examined, a majority (68%) were found to have an undivided nucleus (Fig. 3d). Thus, 63% (68% of 89%) of all cells were large budded with a single nucleus. By contrast, only 16% (41% of 41%) of all control cells showed the same phenotype. These data show that a shift of rts1-null cells to nonpermissive conditions resulted in a significant accumulation of cells in either late G2 or early M. A FACS analysis (Fig. 3e) confirmed that conclusion and also showed that in a growing population of cells at 30°C, a larger percentage of rts1-null cells than controls contained a 2N DNA content. From these data we conclude that RTS1 plays a role in the regulation of cell cycle progression at some point in the G2-to-M transition as well as being required for the proper regulation of stress responses. Overproduction of PIR2 and CLB2 suppresses the rts1-null ts phenotype in different ways. While PIR2 and CLB2 when expressed in high copy are both able to promote enhanced growth of rts1-null cells at 37°C, such cells still do not grow like their wild-type counterparts (Fig. 2c). We examined the morphology of the PIR2- and CLB2-transformed rts1-null cells that had been shifted to 37°C and left for 3 h, and, as might have been predicted, the fraction of CLB2-transformed cells found to be in a large-budded form was significantly reduced relative to that for control cells (Fig. 4). By contrast, PIR2-transformed cells treated in the same fashion showed the same high percentage of large-budded cells as cells transformed with the YEp352 plasmid alone (Fig. 4). As the cdc-like phenotype was still present in the PIR2-transformed cells, this showed that the mode of ts suppression by PIR2 overproduction was distinct from that of CLB2 overproduction. Truncated forms of Rts1p partially replace Rts1p functions. A notable feature of S. cerevisiae Rts1p compared to its homologs in mammals, plants, and Schizosaccharomyces pombe is that it contains approximately 200 additional amino acids at its


3246 SHU ET AL. MOL. CELL. BIOL.

FIG. 2. Identification of genes suppressing the ts phenotype of an rts1-null strain. An S. cerevisiae chromosomal DNA library in the plasmid YEp24 was screened for high-copy suppressors as described in Materials and Methods. The chromosomal DNA inserts and smaller restriction fragments from two suppressing plasmids were recloned into YEp352 and retested for their suppressing activities. (a) Identification of CLB2 as a suppressor. (b) Identification of PIR2 as a suppressor. (c) Growth characteristics at 37°C of rts1-null cells transformed with each of the following plasmids: Yep352, YEpRTS1 (YEp352 RTS1), pSS1-3 (YEp352 CLB2), and pSS2-3

(YEp352 1.5 days. PIR2). Cells initially growing at 30°C on selective plates were removed and streaked onto YPD plates which were then incubated at either 30 or 37°C for


VOL. 17, 1997 S. CEREVISIAE Rts1p 3247

FIG. 3. Morphological characteristics of rts1-null cells at high temperature. rts1-null and wild-type cells growing exponentially in YPD at 25°C were shifted to 37°C and maintained at that temperature for an additional 3 h. Cells fixed as described in Materials and Methods were examined by phase-contrast microscopy. (a) Photomontage of W303 cells maintained at 37°C for 3 h. (b) Photomontage of rts1-null cells maintained at 37°C for 3 h. (c) Relative frequencies of particular cell morphologies of cells incubated at 37°C for 3 h. From the wild-type and mutant cell preparations examined in panels a and b, 400 randomly selected cells from each were categorized as having (i) no bud, (ii) a small bud (less than half of the diameter of the mother cell), or (iii) a large bud (more than half of the diameter of the mother cell). The relative frequency of each class was determined, and these values are indicated for each of the three morphological classes. (d) Nuclear morphologies of large-budded cells. Cells treated as described above were fixed and stained with DAPI. From the wild-type and mutant cell populations, large-budded cells were identified by phase microscopy. Then, by fluorescence microscopy, the locations of nuclear DNA in 300 of these large-budded cells were determined and categorized as one of three types: (i) DNA present only in the mother cell, (ii) DNA located in the junction of a mother cell and its bud, and (iii) DNA present in both the mother cell and its bud. The frequencies of these three classes within the large-budded population were calculated. These values are shown below diagrams of each of the cell types. The value in parentheses is the frequency of such cells in the entire cell population. (e) FACS analysis of rts1-null and W303 cells growing at 30°C or after having been transferred to 37°C and maintained for 3 h.


3248 SHU ET AL.

MOL. CELL. BIOL. cated proteins had not been significantly altered. Also, while Rts1 106p showed as much electrophoretic heterogeneity as the full-sized protein, the majority of Rts1 216p ran at its predicted molecular weight and showed considerably fewer slower-migrating forms. With regard to their biological properties, both genes in single copy only partially suppressed the ts phenotype of the null allele (Fig. 6a), with the shorter form ( 3) reproducibly showing a stronger suppression than the 1 form. We have no idea at this time why this is the case. By contrast, the truncated alleles in single copy fully complemented the null allele with regard to supporting growth on nonfermentable carbon sources (Fig. 6b) or in increasing concentrations of ethanol (Fig. 6c). While expression of Rts1 216p permitted growth at 37°C, it was slow (doubling time, 5 h), and a large fraction of cells (ca. 75%) were found to be in large-budded forms at 37°C (Fig. 4). Thus, while able to carry out certain general stress response functions, cells expressing a truncated Rts1p were still apparently deficient in cell-cycle-related functions at higher temperatures. To directly test this idea, rts1-null cells were transformed with CLB2 on a multicopy plasmid and rts1 216 on a single-copy plasmid. Such double transformants, when shifted to 37°C, grew better than rts1-null cells transformed with either plasmid alone (Fig. 7) and essentially as well as rts1-null cells transformed with RTS1 itself. Furthermore, CLB2 overexpression had no suppressive effect on rts1-null cells with regard to their inability to grow on glycerol (Fig. 6b) or to the inhibitory effects of higher concentrations of ethanol (Fig. 6c). From these results we conclude that the first 200 amino acids of Rts1p are most likely required for the regulation of cell-cyclerelated functions, as they can be functionally replaced by CLB2 overproduction, while the remainder of Rts1p is functionally more involved with the regulation of stress-related functions, some of which can be supplied by PIR2 overproduction at high temperatures.

FIG. 4. Effects of heterologous gene expression on high-temperature-induced G2/M accumulation in rts1-null cells. Cells in early log phase at 30°C in selective glucose-containing medium were transferred to 37°C and left for 3 h and then examined microscopically as described for Fig. 3. The relative frequencies (from a total of 300 cells) of nonbudded, small-budded, and large-budded cells were determined, and these results were plotted. The PIR2 and CLB2 genes were expressed from multicopy plasmids; the rts1 216 gene was expressed from a centromere-containing plasmid. wt, wild type.

amino terminus (references 4, 18, and 39 and unpublished NCBI sequence data). Furthermore, Rts1p displays considerable electrophoretic heterogeneity (34). Given the multiplicity of Rts1p functions, we wondered if an amino-terminally truncated form of Rts1p of the size found in other organisms would complement, either partially or fully, the rts1::HIS3 allele, in either a single copy or multiple copies, and whether shorter forms would also display the same electrophoretic heterogeneity. To that end we constructed two new alleles of the RTS1::HA3 gene: one in which the bases encoding amino acids 2 to 106 were deleted (rts1 106 [ 1]) and another encoding a protein missing amino acids 2 to 216 (rts1 216 [ 3]). The latter gene encoded a protein approximately the same size as those encoded by most of the mammalian B genes (4, 18, 39). Otherwise, the genes and their flanking regions were identical to the wild-type (but epitope-tagged) gene. Both gene constructs were introduced, either on a single-copy (pRS315) or multicopy (YEp352) plasmid, into W303 cells or an isogenic strain containing the rts1::HIS3 allele. The proteins produced from these genes, whether on single-copy or multicopy plasmids, accumulated to levels comparable to those for their fulllength counterpart in both W303 cells and an isogenic rts1-null strain (Fig. 5 [only the results of single-copy expression are shown]), indicating that the degradation properties of the trun-

FIG. 5. Electrophoretic properties of proteins encoded by wild-type and truncated forms of RTS1. W303 and rts1-null cells were transformed with pRS315 plasmids containing the gene RTS1::HA3, rts1 106::HA3, or rts1 216::HA3. Control cells were transformed with the plasmid alone. Total protein extracts were made from early-log-phase cells growing at 30°C in glucose-containing selective medium. SDS­10% PAGE was carried out with equal cellular equivalents from each extract. The separated proteins were transferred to membranes which were immunodecorated by using monoclonal anti-HA antibodies. Lanes: 1, control; 2, Rts1p; 3, Rts1 106p; 4, Rts1 216p.


VOL. 17, 1997 S. CEREVISIAE Rts1p 3249

FIG. 6. Phenotypic characteristics of cells expressing different forms of Rts1p. (a) Cells growing on glucose-containing selective plates at 30°C were removed and streaked onto YPD plates, which were then incubated at 37°C for 1.5 days. (b) Cells growing on glucose-containing selective plates at 30°C were removed and streaked onto YPG plates, which were then incubated at 30°C for 3 days. (c) Early-log-phase cells growing at 30°C in selective glucose-containing medium were diluted to the same initial concentrations into fresh glucose-containing selective medium supplemented with 0, 2, 4, or 6% ethanol. These cell cultures were incubated at 30°C, and after 18 h the cell densities were determined spectrophotometrically. The cell density value for each strain growing at a particular ethanol concentration was expressed as a percentage of the cell density of the same strain growing in the absence of ethanol (which was set at 100% growth). The strains used were the rts1-null containing pRSRTS1 (RTS1), rts1-null containing pRSRTS1 106 ( 1), rts1-null containing pRSRTS1 216 ( 3), rts1-null containing pRS315 (plasmid), rts1-null containing YEpCLB2 (CLB2) strains.

Rts1p is itself a phosphorylated protein. As shown by the following experiments, most but not all of the electrophoretic heterogeneity displayed by Rts1p can be ascribed to phosphorylation. First, cells expressing the HA epitope-tagged fulllength Rts1p and those expressing the two truncated forms from these three strains were immunoprecipitated, and the precipitated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and then analyzed by autoradiography (Fig. 8a). In each case, radioactive proteins of the same size range as that seen in Fig. 5 were detected. While this result suggested that the electrophoretic heterogeneity might be due to phosphorylation, it does not prove it. To directly test that, total protein extracts were prepared from the three different strains and immunoprecipitated. Aliquots of the immunoprecipitated protein were then treated with various amounts of either alkaline phosphatase or lambda protein phosphatase prior to being resolubilized and electrophoretically analyzed (Fig. 8b). In all cases, the slower-moving forms of the full-length and the truncated forms of Rts1p disappeared upon being treated with alkaline phosphatase (the results with the lambda protein phosphatase were identical [data not shown]). However, in the case of the full-length form and the longer truncated form, two electrophoretic species remained after the enzyme treatment. These forms persisted even when the phosphatase amount was increased fourfold. While these results show that the majority of the electrophoretic heterogeneity of Rts1p must be due to phosphorylation, at this time we do not know the cause of the remaining nonuniformity of electrophoretic mobility following phosphatase treatment.

were labeled with 32 Pi. The proteins from total cell extracts

Cdc55p, a PP2A B regulatory subunit, serves a function different from that of Rts1p. As indicated earlier, a PP2A B (as opposed to B ) regulatory subunit, Cdc55p, has already been described (9). The authors showed this gene to be nonessential but reported that a strain containing a disrupted copy of CDC55 was cold sensitive and that it exhibits morphological abnormalities (viz., elongated and abnormally shaped buds), even to some degree at permissive temperatures. Such cells

FIG. 7. Synergistic effects of rts1 216 and multicopy CLB2 expression on the temperature sensitivity of rts1-null cells. rts1-null cells transformed with pRSRTS1 (RTS1), pRS315 with no insert (plasmid only), pRSRTS1 216 ( 3), YEpCLB2 (CLB2), or both pRSRTS1 216 and YEpCLB2 ( 3 CLB2) were taken from selective glucose-containing plates incubated at 30°C and streaked onto YPD plates, which were then incubated at 37°C for 1.5 days.


3250 SHU ET AL.

FIG. 8. Analysis of phosphorylated forms of Rts1p. (a) Early-log-phase W303 cells transformed with pRS315 carrying HA-tagged forms of RTS1 (lane 1), phosphate-depleted growth medium. Total cell protein extracts were prepared, anti-HA immunoprecipitates were collected, the resulting proteins were separated by SDS­10% PAGE, and the gel was autoradiographed (see Materials and Methods). (b) The same cell strains were grown in normal selective medium, and the proteins from them were extracted and immunoprecipitated as for panel a. However, before the immunoadsorbed proteins were released from the agarose beads, they were treated in 0.5 ml of the appropriate solution with either 2,000 or 8,000 U of calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase for 30 min at 37°C. Following this, proteins were eluted from the beads, separated by SDS­10% PAGE, transferred to filters, and immunodecorated with an anti-HA antibody. rts1p, product of the RTS1 gene; 1p, product of the rts1 106 gene; 3p, product of the rts1 216 gene. Lane 1, proteins treated at 37°C for 30 min with no enzyme; lanes 2 and 3, proteins treated with 2,000 and 8,000 U of alkaline phosphatase, respectively.

RTS1 106 (lane 2), or RTS1 216 (lane 3) were labeled with 32 Pi for 2 h in

reportedly exhibit no abnormal properties at elevated temperatures. While Cdc55p has no detectable sequence homology to Rts1p, this does not necessarily mean that they might not be, at least in part, functionally interchangeable. To test whether it is the presence of the gene encoding the alternative B subunit that provides an essential function for either of the strains expressing a single knockout of cdc55 or rts1, we asked whether a strain with both genes disrupted was viable. A diploid strain containing single copies of the mutant alleles rts1::HIS3 and cdc55::TRP1 was constructed (see Materials and Methods) and induced to sporulate. With one exception, spores from nine dissected tetrads were all viable (Fig. 9), and the two selective disrupting markers independently segregated in all cases. Clearly, the double-knockout strain was viable. We concluded from these results that, as PP2A activity is essential for cell viability (27), either PP2A can function in vivo without any form of B regulatory subunit or S. cerevisiae must have at least one other gene encoding a third type of B subunit. At 30°C, cdc55-null and rts1-null strains both grew slightly slower than wild-type cells. The double-null strain had an even slower growth rate than either of the single-null strains. These relative growth rates are evident in the sizes of the colonies derived from the dissections of asci (Fig. 9). While rts1-null cells exhibit extremely slow growth at 37°C, the double-null strain showed absolutely no growth at 37°C. In our hands, both the cdc55-null and double-null strains were not inhibited for growth at 14°C. The cell shapes of the cdc55-null and doublenull strains were examined by phase-contrast microscopy. As reported previously (9), about 15% of cdc55-null cells became elongated at 30°C (Fig. 10a), and 100% were elongated, resembling pseudohyphae, when grown at 14°C (data not shown). The double-null strain showed a similar proportion of cells with elongated buds at 30°C, but these cells tended to be somewhat larger than the elongated cdc55-null cells (Fig. 10b). Overall, it appeared that the phenotype of the double-null strain was simply the sum of the phenotypic defects generated by the two disrupted genes. However, it cannot be as simple as

MOL. CELL. BIOL. that, as overproduction of Clb2p in the double-null strain does not suppress the ts lesion in such cells (data not shown). The different appearances of cdc55-null and rts1-null cells at their respective nonpermissive temperatures, and the fact that the phenotype of the double-null strain was essentially an additive one, suggested that these two B subunits have significantly different functions in vivo. To address this question directly, we used a genetic approach. If CDC55 and RTS1 have any overlapping functions, one might expect that overexpression of CDC55 in rts1-null cells might partially or fully suppress the ts phenotype. Similarly, overexpression of RTS1 in the cdc55-null strain might suppress to some degree the morphologically abnormal phenotype of these cells. What we found was that overexpression of RTS1 in the cdc55-null strain exacerbated the morphological abnormalities, causing them to be manifested strongly not only at 14°C but at 30°C as well (Fig. 10c). This was not simply the result of excess Rts1p in the cell, as a similar phenotype appeared in a strain that both was cdc55-null and expressed a single rts1 216 allele (data not shown). Also, overexpression of CDC55 in rts1-null cells caused them to grow extremely slowly at 30°C, an effect not seen when CDC55 is overexpressed in wild-type cells (Fig. 11). Furthermore, a large fraction (ca. 60%) of these slow-growing cells became enlarged and contained a large bud (data not shown). Finally, unlike the situation in rts1-null cells, overexpression of CLB2 in the cdc55-null strain had no effect, positively or negatively, on the mutant phenotype of these cells. Taken as a whole, these data not only are consistent with Rts1p and Cdc55p playing totally different roles with regard to PP2A function but suggest further that there may be competitive or antagonistic aspects to these functions.

FIG. 9. Tetrad analysis of cells heterozygous for null alleles of the CDC55 and RTS1 genes. Strain YSC1 (cdc55::TRP1/CDC55 rts1::HIS3/RTS1) was induced to sporulate. Nine tetrads were dissected and grown on a YPD plate for 6 days at 30°C. The resulting haploid cells were replicated onto selective plates to identify cells able to grow in the absence of histidine and/or tryptophan. The segregation pattern of the selectable markers, indicating the presence of one or the other, both, or neither of the null alleles, is shown below the photograph of the colonies of individual asci. wt, wild type; C, cdc55 null; R, rts1 null; RC, rts1 null and cdc55 null.


VOL. 17, 1997 S. CEREVISIAE Rts1p 3251

absence of a direct enzymatic assay, that Rts1p must be a PP2A regulatory subunit. Role of Rts1p in cell cycle regulation. The identification of the CLB2 gene as a high-copy suppressor of an rts1-null strain was the first indication that a requirement for Rts1p activity might be cell cycle related. This notion was confirmed by our finding that an rts1-null strain exhibited a typical cdc-like mutant phenotype at a nonpermissive temperature. The appearance of increased percentages of rts1-null cells with large buds, an undivided nucleus, and 2N DNA content relative to controls when exposed to a high temperature indicated that these cells had accumulated in either the late G2 or early M phase of the cell cycle. As it has been recently shown that PP2A activity is required for the activation of the Cdc28-Clb2 kinase (14), it appears to us quite likely that this activation is, at least in part, supplied by the PP2A-Rts1 form of this phosphatase. Of course, this remains to be directly demonstrated. Measurement of Cdc28-Clb2 kinase activity in rts1-null cells at permissive and nonpermissive temperatures should allow for a direct test of these ideas. The fact that Clb2p overproduction suppresses the temperature sensitivity of the rts1-null strain is consistent with the finding (14) that Clb2p overproduction also transiently suppresses the mutant phenotype of a strain in which all or most PP2A activity can be heat inactivated. In this case, while the ts phenotype of this strain is an arrest of cells at the G2/M boundary, Clb2p overproduction allows cells to pass this G2/M arrest and complete nuclear and cell division. However, no further cell divisions occur. By contrast, Clb2p overproduction in the rts1-null strain brings about a continuing suppression of the normal high-temperature arrest. We interpret both of these results as indicating that a specific PP2A-Rts1 activity is required for Cdc28-Clb2 kinase activation but that in its absence excess Clb2p can, in some unknown way, bring about the same kinase activation and the cell can then proceed through the G2/M boundary and divide. In the case of the rts1-null strain, other PP2A requirements are fully met by the normal A, C, and B subunit-encoding genes, and therefore, with the bypass of the normal Cdc28-Clb2 activation by Clb2p overproduction, cell growth can proceed. By contrast, in the strain expressing a ts form of the PP2A catalytic subunit (14), the same bypass afforded by overproduction of Clb2p permits one cell division

FIG. 10. Morphological effects of overexpression of RTS1 in the cdc55-null strain. Cells growing on selective agar plates at 30°C were removed, washed, fixed, and then examined by phase-contrast microscopy. (a) cdc55-null cells transformed with the plasmid YEp352. (b) Cells null for both the cdc55 and rts1 genes transformed with YEp352. (c) cdc55-null cells transformed with YEp352 carrying RTS1.

DISCUSSION Proof that Rts1p is a PP2A subunit. While we have shown that both Pph21p and Rts1p are found in complexes of approximately 200 kDa and that they must be in the same complex, we have not directly shown that such complexes display serine/threonine protein phosphatase activity. However, as the coisolation of Pph21p and Rts1p required the presence of Tpd3p in the cell extract, these data show that at least some of these three proteins must coexist in a common complex. Given that Pph21p and Tpd3p are considered bona fide components of PP2A complexes in yeast (14, 27, 36, 42), and considering the homology of Rts1p with well-characterized B regulatory subunits in mammals (4, 18, 39), we are confident, even in the

FIG. 11. Effects of overexpression of CDC55 in the rts1-null strain. Cell suspensions from early-log-phase cultures with identical numbers of wild-type ( W303) or rts1-null ( RTS1) cells transformed with either YEp352 or YEpCDC55 (YEp352 carrying a functional CDC55 gene) were grown for 3 days at 30°C. Lane 1, 10 l of the undiluted cell suspensions; lane 2, 10 l of 3-fold dilutions of the initial cell suspensions; lane 3, 10 l of 9-fold dilutions of the

initial cell suspensions; lane 4, 10 suspensions. l of 27-fold dilutions of the initial cell


3252 SHU ET AL.

in the absence of PP2A activity. However, as PP2A activity is essential for many other cellular functions, the cells die. Recent reports (20, 46) have shown that the other PP2A B regulatory subunit, Cdc55p, is required for the kinetochore/ spindle checkpoint regulatory pathway. This regulation apparently occurs through steps involving inactivation of the Cdc28cyclin B complex. Given our results showing possible competitive or even antagonistic activities imparted to PP2A complexes by the two alternative B subunits, and given the fact that rts1-null cells show cell cycle defects, it will be important to determine the different points of control of these two different PP2A complexes and their in vivo substrates. Properties of the truncated forms of Rts1p. Thus far, no other B subunit sequence reported in the NCBI databases shows any homology to the first 200 amino acids of Rts1p. This includes 13 mammalian sequences and 1 Arabidopsis thaliana, 1 S. pombe, and 1 Caenorhabditis elegans sequence. All DNA sequences reported thus far, when complete, predict primary translation products ranging in size from 52 to 58 kDa, far from the 85 kDa predicted for Rts1p. Since we interpret our data as suggesting that the 200-amino-acid N-terminal extension of Rts1p (relative to all other B proteins) may have as its primary role the regulation of cell-cycle-associated functions, it will be of interest to see whether expression of any heterologous B genes in S. cerevisiae will suppress stress-related functions but, as with Rts1 216p, be unable to suppress G2/M accumulation at high temperatures. More specifically, if it can be shown that Rts1p is required for the activation of Cdc28-Clb2 kinase activity, then it can be asked whether Rts1p 216 or any Rts1p homologs can also supply such activity. Posttranslational modification of Rts1p. Our data show that Rts1p must be multiply phosphorylated while cells are in logphase growth. Where on the protein and on which amino acid residues these modifications occur are not known, but the fact that the extent of electrophoretic heterogeneity is reduced considerably in the shortest truncated form of Rts1p suggests that a number of the phosphorylatable amino acids reside in the N-terminal portion of the protein. While dephosphorylation of the full-sized Rts1p and Rts1p 106p ( 1) results in a population of molecules with two distinct electrophoretic mobilities, this is not true when Rts1 216p ( 3) is similarly treated (Fig. 8b). Whether this indicates that some other posttranslational modification occurs in the first 216 residues of Rts1p or whether a phosphorylated residue is more resistant to enzymatic cleavage in the longer forms of the protein remains to be determined. We have asked the obvious question as to whether the state of electrophoretic heterogeneity of Rts1p changes either during a cell cycle, during different stages of cell growth, or under different physiologically stressful situations. While we have, at times, seen variations in electrophoretic patterns of Rts1p, these have been neither systematically observed nor reproducible. Further work is being carried out to clarify these observations. It will also be interesting to find out whether the recently described (19) phosphorylated forms of mammalian B PP2A regulatory subunits also undergo some change in phosphorylated state. The PP2A B regulatory subunit gene family in S. cerevisiae. We were surprised to find not only that the double-null strain ( rts1 cdc55) was viable but that the phenotype of such a strain was essentially the sum of the phenotypes of the two single-null strains. As PP2A phosphatase activity is essential for cell viability (27), this would seem to indicate that a PP2A AC dimer is active in vivo and/or another B regulatory subunit exists in S. cerevisiae. Reduced-stringency hybridization in Southern analyses with either a CDC55 or RTS1 gene probe

MOL. CELL. BIOL. revealed no detectable homologs. Furthermore, a computer search of the S. cerevisiae genome database also revealed no obvious homologs of either CDC55 or RTS1, indicating the absence of other B or B class members, nor did it find a homolog of a mammalian B (B72) gene, indicating the probable absence of this class of B regulatory subunits in S. cerevisiae. (By contrast, a well-conserved B gene sequence is found in a search of the C. elegans genome database.) Thus, should a gene encoding another type of B regulatory subunit exist in S. cerevisiae, the protein it encodes would probably be as unrelated, in terms of sequence, to Cdc55p and Rts1p as the two are to each other. Finally, it is worth noting that, at least superficially, the phenotype of tpd3-null cells is similar to that of a doubleknockout strain, the cdc55 rts1 strain. Both strains are inhibited for growth at both high and low temperatures, but not to the same degrees. Similarly, both exhibit abnormal morphologies, but these morphological differences are not identical either qualitatively or with regard to the temperatures at which they are induced (data not shown). These differences may or may not be due to the fact that such characterizations were carried out with nonisogenic strains. The proper characterizations are now in progress and may give us further clues as to the necessary functional relationships between the different PP2A subunits. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Kim Arndt for the plasmids encoding an epitope-tagged form of the PPH21 gene on single-copy and multicopy plasmids and the tpd3-null strain and Jeff Schatz for his gift of hsp60 antiserum. Saul Honigberg's critical review of an earlier version of this paper is also greatly appreciated. The initial part of this work was supported by NIH grant GM-46302 (to R.H.). REFERENCES 1. Ausubel, F. M., R. Brent, R. E. Kingston, D. D. Moore, J. A. Smith, J. G. Seidman, and K. Struhl. 1989. Current protocols in molecular biology. John Wiley and Sons, New York, N.Y. 2. Carlson, M., and D. Botstein. 1982. Two differentially regulated mRNAs with different 5 ends encode secreted with intracellular forms of yeast invertase. Cell 28:145­154. 3. Cohen, P. 1989. The structure and regulation of protein phosphatases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 58:453­508. 4. Csortos, C., S. Zolnierowicz, E. Bako, S. D. Durbin, and A. A. DePaoliRoach. 1996. High complexity in the expression of the B subunit of protein phosphatase 2A. J. Biol. Chem. 271:2578­2588. 5. Depaoli-Roach, A. A., I. K. Park, V. Cerovsky, C. Csortos, S. D. Durbin, M. J. Kuntz, A. Sitikov, P. M. Tang, A. Verin, and S. Zolnierowiz. 1994. Serine/ threonine protein phosphatases in the control of cell function. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 34:199­224. 6. Di Como, C. J., and K. T. Arndt. 1996. Nutrients, via the Tor proteins, stimulate the association of Tap42 with type 2A phosphatases. Genes Dev. 10:1904­1916. 7. Evangelista, C. C., T. Rodriguez, M. P. Limbach, and S. R. Zitomer. 1996. Rox3 and Rts1 function in the global stress response pathway in Baker's yeast. Genetics 142:1083­1093. 8. Hallberg, E. M., Y. Shu, and R. L. Hallberg. 1993. Loss of mitochondrial hsp60 function: nonequivalent effects on matrix-targeted and intermembrane-targeted proteins. Mol. Cell. Biol. 13:3050­3057. 9. Healy, A. M., S. Zolnierowicz, A. E. Stapleton, M. Goebl, A. A. DePaoliRoach, and J. R. Pringle. 1991. CDC55, a Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene involved in cellular morphogenesis: identification, characterization, and homology to the B subunit of mammalian type 2A protein phosphatase. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:5767­5780. 10. Hendrix, P., R. E. Mayer-Jaekel, P. Cron, J. Goris, J. Hofsteenge, W. Merlevede, and B. A. Hemmings. 1993. Structure and expression of a 72-kDa regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A: evidence for different size forms produced by alliterative splicing. J. Biol. Chem. 268:15267­15276. 11. Hill, J. E., A. M. Myers, T. J. Korner, and A. Tzagloff. 1986. Yeast/E. coli shuttle vectors with multiple unique restriction sites. Yeast 2:163­167. 12. Kamibayashi, C., R. Estes, R. L. Lickteig, S. I. Yang, C. Craft, and M. C. Mumby. 1994. Comparison of heterotrimeric protein phosphatase 2A con-


VOL. 17, 1997 taining different B subunits. J. Biol. Chem. 269:20139­20148. 13. Leibowitz, M. J., F. P. Barbone, and D. E. Georgopoulos. 1991. In vitro protein synthesis. Methods Enzymol. 194:536­545. 14. Lin, F. C., and K. T. Arndt. 1995. The role of Saccharomyces cerevisiae type 2A phosphatase in the actin cytoskeleton and in entry into mitosis. EMBO J. 14:2745­2759. 15. Luke, M. M., F. Della Seta, C. J. DiComo, H. Sugimoto, R. Kobayashi, and K. T. Arndt. 1996. The SAPs, a new family of proteins, associate and function with SIT4 phosphatase. Mol. Cell. Biol. 16:2744­2755. 16. Mayer, R. E., P. Hendrix, P. Cron, R. Matties, S. R. Stone, J. Goris, W. Merlevede, J. Hofsteenge, and B. A. Hemmings. 1991. Structure of 55-kDA regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A: evidence for a neuronalspecific isoform. Biochemistry 30:3589­3597. 17. Mayer-Jaekel, R. E., and B. A. Hemmings. 1994. Protein phosphatase 2A--a `me´nage `a trois'. Trends Cell Biol. 4:287­291. 18. McCright, B., and D. M. Virshup. 1995. Identification of a new family of protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunits. J. Biol. Chem. 270:26123­ 26128. 19. McCright, B., A. M. Rivers, S. Audlin, and D. M. Virshup. 1996. The B56 family of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) regulatory subunits encodes differentiation-induced phophoproteins that target PP2A to both nucleus and cytoplasm. J. Biol. Chem. 271:22081­22089. 20. Minshull, J., A. Straight, A. D. Rudner, A. F. Dernburg, A. Belmont, and A. W. Murray. 1996. Protein phosphatase 2A regulates MPF activity and sister chromatid cohesion in budding yeast. Curr. Biol. 6:1609­1620. 21. Mumby, M. 1995. Regulation by tumor antigens defines a role for PP2A in signal transduction. Semin. Cancer Biol. 6:229­237. 22. Mumby, M., and G. Walter. 1993. Protein serine/threonine phosphatases: structure, regulation, and functions in cell growth. Physiol. Rev. 74:673­699. 23. Mumby, M. C., K. L. Russell, L. J. Garrard, and D. D. Green. 1987. Cardiac contractile protein phosphatases. Purification of two enzyme forms and their characterization with subunit-specific antibodies. J. Biol. Chem. 262:6257­ 6265. 24. Nickels, J. T., and J. R. Broach. 1996. A ceramide-activated protein phosphatase mediates ceramide-induced G1 arrest of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genes Dev. 10:382­394. 25. Prasad, T. K., E. Hack, and R. L. Hallberg. 1990. Function of the maize mitochondrial chaperonin hsp60: specific association between hsp60 and newly synthesized F1-ATPase alpha subunits. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10:3979­3986. 26. Richardson, H., D. L. Lew, M. Heneze, K. Sugimoto, and S. I. Reed. 1992. Cyclin-B homologs in S. cerevisiae function in S phase and G2. Genes Dev. 6:2021­2034. 27. Ronne, H., M. Carlberg, G. Z. Hu, and J. O. Nehlin. 1991. Protein phosphatase 2A in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: effects on cell growth and bud morphogenesis. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:4876­4884. 28. Rosenblum-Vos, L. S., L. Rhodes, C. C. Evangelista, K. A. Boayke, and R. Zitomer. 1991. The ROX3 gene encodes an essential nuclear protein involved in CYC7 gene expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:5639­5647. 29. Rospert, S., and R. L. Hallberg. 1995. Interaction of hsp60 with proteins imported into the mitochondrial matrix. Methods Enzymol. 260:287­292. 30. Rothstein, R. J. 1983. One-step gene disruption in yeast. Methods Enzymol. 101:202­211. 31. Ruediger, R., D. Roeckel, J. Fait, A. Bergqvist, G. Magnusson, and G. Walter. 1992. Identification of binding sites on the regulatory A subunit of protein phosphatase 2A for the catalytic C subunit and for tumor antigens of S. CEREVISIAE Rts1p simian virus 40 and polyomavirus. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12:4872­4882.

3253

32. Russo, P., N. Kalkkinen, H. Sereneva, J. Paakkola, and M. Makarow. 1992. A heat shock gene for Saccharomyces cerevisiae encoding a secretory glycoprotein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89:3671­3675. 33. Shenolikar, S. 1994. Protein serine/threonine phosphatases--new avenues for cell regulation. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 10:55­86. 34. Shu, Y., and R. L. Hallberg. 1995. SCS1, a multicopy suppressor of hsp60-ts mutant alleles, does not encode a mitochondrially targeted protein. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15:5618­5626. 35. Sikorski, R. S., and P. Hieter. 1989. A system of shuttle vectors and yeast host strains designed for efficient manipulation of DNA in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 122:19­27. 36. Sneddon, A. A., P. T. Cohen, and M. J. Stark. 1990. Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein phosphatase 2A performs an essential cellular function and is encoded by two genes. EMBO J. 9:4339­4346. 37. Sontage, E., V. Nunbhakdi-Craig, G. S. Bloom, and M. C. Mumby. 1995. A novel pool of protein phosphatase 2A is associated with microtubules and is regulated during the cell cycle. J. Cell Biol. 128:1131­1144. 38. Surana, U., H. Robitsch, C. Price, T. Schuster, I. Fitch, A. B. Futcher, and K. Nasmyth. 1991. The role of CDC28 and cyclins during mitosis in budding yeast S. cerevisiae. Cell 65:145­161. 39. Tehrani, M. A., M. C. Mumby, and C. Kamibayashi. 1996. Identification of a novel protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunit highly expressed in muscle. J. Biol. Chem. 217:5164­5170. 40. Toh-E, A., S. Yasunaga, H. Nisogi, K. Tanaka, T. Oguchi, and Y. Matsui. 1993. Three yeast genes, PIR1, PIR2, and PIR3, containing internal tandem repeats, are related to each other, and PIR1 and PIR2 are required for tolerance to heat shock. Yeast 9:481­494. 41. Turowski, P., A. Fernandez, B. Favre, N. J. Lamb, and B. A. Hemmings. 1995. Differential methylation and altered conformation of cytoplasmic and nuclear forms of protein phosphatase 2A during cell cycle progression. J. Cell Biol. 129:397­410. 42. van Zyl, W., W. Huang, A. A. Sneddon, M. Stark, S. Camier, M. Werner, C. Marck, A. Sentenac, and J. R. Broach. 1992. Inactivation of the protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunit A results in morphological and transcriptional defects in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12:4946­4959. 43. van Zyl, W., N. Wills, and J. R. Broach. 1989. A general screen for mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae deficient in tRNA biosynthesis. Genetics 123: 55­68. 44. Virshup, D. M., A. Russo, and T. J. Kelly. 1992. Mechanism of activation of simian virus 40 DNA replication by protein phosphatase 2A. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12:4883­4895. 45. Walter, G., and M. Mumby. 1993. Protein serine/threonine phosphatases and cell transformation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1155:207­226. 46. Wang, Y., and D. J. Burke. 1997. Cdc55p, the B-type regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A, has multiple functions in mitosis and is required for the kinetochore/spindle checkpoint in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol. 17:620­626. 47. Warner, J. R. 1991. Labeling of RNA and phosphoproteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Methods Enzymol. 194:423­427. 48. Wera, S., and B. A. Hemmings. 1995. Serine/threonine phosphatases. Biochem. J. 311:17­29. 49. Zolnierowicz, S., C. Csortos, J. Bonder, A. Verin, and M. C. Mumby. 1994. Diversity of regulatory B subunits of protein phosphatase 2A: identification of a novel isoform highly expressed in brain. Biochemistry 33:11858­11867.


